[Amit Varma]: A famous expert in political philosophy, Spiderman, once said that with great power comes great
[Amit Varma]: responsibility. I'd put my superhero cape on here, you can call me podcast man, and
[Amit Varma]: add that what you really need with great power is great humility. I think of this especially
[Amit Varma]: in the context of public policy. Those in charge of the levers of the state, especially
[Amit Varma]: in a country like India, possess great power. They imagine they can design and control.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, their mandate is to design and control complex systems which cannot be run from the
[Amit Varma]: top down, like an economy, for example. And while ignorance is a problem, it is made worse
[Amit Varma]: by hubris and ignorance of that ignorance. As Frederick Hayek, one of my heroes, once
[Amit Varma]: said, quote, the curious task of economics is to demonstrate to men how little they really
[Amit Varma]: know about what they imagine they can design. Stop good. I would argue that this problem
[Amit Varma]: is worse in India than elsewhere. It is an almost intuitive notion in our culture that
[Amit Varma]: the solution to every big problem lies in state intervention. And our state is designed
[Amit Varma]: to intervene. It has been given too much power and discretion. Coercion is in its DNA. The
[Amit Varma]: question then arises, when even smart, well meaning people enter this vast parasitic beast
[Amit Varma]: known as government, how do they keep their heads around them? How do they not get carried
[Amit Varma]: away by the power they possess? And even if they manage to be an oasis of humility and
[Amit Varma]: rationality, is it even possible to tame this beast from within?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Baruman. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. The subject
[Amit Varma]: of today's episode is two related questions that fascinate me. One, how do we define good
[Amit Varma]: public policy? What are the heuristics by which we arrive at public policy and the parameters
[Amit Varma]: by which we should judge it? Two, what do the bowels of the great Indian state look
[Amit Varma]: like from within? And how does one navigate them? My guests on the show today are Vijay
[Amit Varma]: Kelkar and Ajay Shah, who've written a remarkable book called, In Service of the Republic, The
[Amit Varma]: Art and Science of Economic Policy. At one level, this book is a primer on how to formulate
[Amit Varma]: and craft public policy. But you can also read it as a book of philosophy, which crisply
[Amit Varma]: and lucidly lays out the first principles from which we should proceed and elaborates
[Amit Varma]: upon the implications of those principles on policy, and therefore, on human welfare.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, these two gentlemen are not armchair observers. They have been in the trenches
[Amit Varma]: fighting policy wars. They have been generals leading the forces of reform. They know what
[Amit Varma]: they're talking about. Vijay served the Government of India as Petroleum Secretary, Finance Secretary
[Amit Varma]: and Chairman of the 13th Finance Commission of India. He has served as Director of the
[Amit Varma]: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and as Executive Director of the IMF. He was
[Amit Varma]: awarded the Padma Vibhushan in 2011. Ajay Shah is an old guest on the show. He's appeared
[Amit Varma]: on a couple of prior episodes and an old friend of mine. He's worked at the Centre of Monitoring
[Amit Varma]: Indian Economy, the Indira Gandhi Institution for Development Research and the Ministry
[Amit Varma]: of Finance. He's a professor at the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy. Ajay
[Amit Varma]: has, of course, been on the show before. So I'm actually going to begin this conversation
[Amit Varma]: by asking Vijay a bit about his background and how he got into being a policy person,
[Guest 1]: basically.
[Guest 1]: You know, when I look back, my life was full of accidents and turns and twists. After my
[Guest 1]: PhD, I came back and in talking of my own sort of that dimensional history, I learned
[Guest 1]: neoclassical economics from Professor Debreu in the classrooms, but understood what it
[Guest 1]: means in the Barrow's Hall of Berkeley, which at that time was, you know, was full of free
[Guest 1]: speech movement sort of environment. And so I grew up in that sort of understood that
[Guest 1]: two sides of the coin. One is what one learns and very pristine theory and what really happens
[Guest 1]: in the society. Then I came back and joined teaching, I teach a teaching profession. Teaching
[Guest 1]: but then I went to Planning Commission, worked as a mid-branch chakravarti and then continued
[Guest 1]: in different, then I went to Ministry of Commerce and now thinking, looking back, I'm surprised
[Guest 1]: that I'm not advised by any of my friends. Every job was contract, I was a contract labourer,
[Guest 1]: I didn't have a permanent job. Because unlike, you know, one thing in a way is good, one
[Guest 1]: is bad. Every increment was a post in Government of India is a fresh post, advertised by UPSC
[Guest 1]: and you go to UPSC interview. So one can be a term contractor. So there's an advantage
[Guest 1]: and disadvantage because there's a much freer entry because unfortunately increasingly it's
[Guest 1]: getting what they call encoded. So that's how I went from and then my, in Planning Commission
[Guest 1]: my other mentor I met was Lavrash Kumar. So I was in Geneva actually, he said why don't
[Guest 1]: you come and work with me in Petroleum Ministry. I said I don't know what petrol is, I don't
[Guest 1]: use petrol in my scooter. He said no, no, no, don't worry, I'll teach you. He was a
[Guest 1]: petroleum man. And that's how I sort of spent a lot of many years in Petroleum Ministry.
[Amit Varma]: One question for both of you really. Ajay before this when we were at breakfast, we
[Amit Varma]: were talking about how in India there are sort of these two competing in two contradictory
[Amit Varma]: intuitions rather, which are one there is the personal intuition where we are fairly
[Amit Varma]: liberal in our personal lives. But then there is also the intuition in our culture that
[Amit Varma]: the state is the solution to all our problems with all the attendant issues of coercion
[Amit Varma]: and all the things that go wrong with intervention and so on. So at like, how deeply ingrained
[Amit Varma]: were was especially the second intuition for you when you came to thinking about government
[Amit Varma]: and how common was it within government itself that the society's problems will be solved
[Guest 1]: by the state?
[Guest 1]: You know, I mean, there our training saved us from that. Because one thing, economics
[Guest 1]: teaches the role of incentives. And so it's not that difficult. But I've seen this a major
[Guest 1]: major major sort of paradigm within the government. I'll give a simple example in Ministry of
[Guest 1]: Petroleum. I met a very sophisticated man as Cabinet Secretary. And we were proposing
[Guest 1]: giving international prices of oil. I said, if you want to promote exploration, give the
[Guest 1]: prices which is what is the value is of that product. He said, why do you want? You are
[Guest 1]: a Petroleum Secretary. Just order, won't you find oil? Just put more money. I said, no
[Guest 1]: they have to incentivize to because they just would not see. He says, when this is a publicly
[Guest 1]: owned company is under your ministry, just tell them to invest more in exploration. So
[Guest 1]: this is somehow, he was a very sophisticated man. I mean, in terms of sheer mind power
[Guest 1]: is, you know, par with anybody else. But so I think, your training helps you escape that.
[Guest 1]: You learn that I mean, the importance of incentive. That's one, you know, first thing you learn.
[Guest 1]: But it's quite ubiquitous, that you order and things happen, because your government
[Guest 1]: is ordered.
[Amit Varma]: And Ajay, you also worked in government since the 90s. And you worked in the Ministry of
[Amit Varma]: Finance, you worked elsewhere and all that. Is economic thinking commonly understood within
[Amit Varma]: government like there's a whole section in your book about the science of public policy
[Amit Varma]: where you talk about what I would imagine would be sort of econ 101 concept in terms
[Amit Varma]: of sort of, like, why does this need to be told to policymakers kind of thing? What spontaneous
[Amit Varma]: order is and how prices work and all of that. And it seems to me that the impetus for that
[Amit Varma]: possibly it's not as commonly understood as one would think.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so all of us have funny stories about what happens inside government. And here's
[Guest 2]: my funny story. I was new to government. I joined the Ministry of Finance and there was
[Guest 2]: a discussion, a big elaborate discussion on what the export target next year was going
[Guest 2]: to be. And I was just this bewildered child in the room saying, excuse me, none of you
[Guest 2]: blokes in the room export. The exports are all done by some private people out there.
[Guest 2]: Who are you to set a target for them? And it's really, you know, in a civilized society,
[Guest 2]: it is private people that decide to export, decide to not export. And no government has
[Guest 2]: a target for exports. But I was overruled. The room was clear that we will set an export
[Guest 2]: target every year. And the Ministry of Commerce will then work towards that target. And the
[Guest 2]: Ministry of Commerce will be held accountable for delivering on that target. And what do
[Guest 2]: they do? Then they try to come up with export incentives. So you try to pay subsidies to
[Guest 2]: people to export, which is just a very negation of the whole point. Export orientation is
[Guest 2]: good because we get firms that are globally competitive, that are good at what they do.
[Guest 2]: If you pay a guy a subsidy to export, you haven't actually got the productivity. It's,
[Guest 2]: you know, it's mixing up means and ends. Exporting is valuable because it reflects productivity
[Guest 2]: in firms. It forces firms to compete in world markets and get good at what they do and match
[Guest 2]: global standards of quality. If you're going to pay a guy in terms of an export subsidy
[Guest 2]: or a distorted exchange rate, then what's the point? You've actually not got what you
[Guest 2]: really wanted, which is productivity. Instead, you met a target, which is exports. So this
[Guest 2]: kind of paradox comes up all the time.
[Amit Varma]: Saeed Khan-And so bureaucracies are basically set up where they're taking all these boxes
[Amit Varma]: and they have all of these parameters, but there's no deeper thinking about what is sort
[Amit Varma]: of tell me the sort of
[Guest 1]: Amit Bhandari, can I just pursue this point? It's a very important point. You know, our
[Guest 1]: export policy is designed to give export subsidies. And we give export subsidies to inefficient
[Guest 1]: products. Because you end up with a more costlier, that's why you give subsidy because they say
[Guest 1]: textiles don't require subsidies because they're efficient. So instead of promoting what is
[Guest 1]: efficient, you try to promote something else. And then there's other, it's very difficult
[Guest 1]: to persuade simple point, which Abba Lerner wrote about almost 100 years ago, that when
[Guest 1]: you put due to the imports, you're also taxing exports. This simple, very difficult to persuade
[Guest 1]: them that don't have the protection regime because you're already creating a problem
[Guest 1]: for more efficient lines of your country's production structure. So his point is, he's
[Guest 1]: absolutely right, that somehow, incentives, I just don't understand the role of incentives,
[Guest 1]: how it can play, and what we're trying to do. We know better. And that's where we want
[Guest 1]: to go. And we end up doing exactly the opposite. You don't know where you want to go because
[Guest 1]: namely bind Indian economy, and you have inefficient production structure.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk about how the book came about, like very early in the book, there
[Amit Varma]: is this sentence, which kind of struck me as being very reflective of your urgency towards
[Amit Varma]: these issues, Ajay, which is, quote, we must get rich before we get old, stop quote, which
[Amit Varma]: is like, but it's sort of, you know, like, you know, every time I've met you, Ajay, in
[Amit Varma]: fact, that there is this urgency that we have to do something now that, you know, otherwise
[Amit Varma]: we shall lose what they call the demographic dividend and so on.
[Guest 1]: You know, I mean, if you look at historically after the Second World War, all the Asian
[Guest 1]: miracles, starting with Japan, then these four tigers, and in China, all have one thing
[Guest 1]: in common, not Confucianism, but demographic transition. All of them are a sweet spot where
[Guest 1]: the share of working population has the highest. And there is no rocket science because that's
[Guest 1]: where you have a major advantage in terms of supply side of the productive forces. And
[Guest 1]: that's what exactly we are. We're just 15, 20 years behind China, you know, demographic
[Guest 1]: transition. That's where the urgency, because then it's a, I may be exaggerating, but it's
[Guest 1]: really one apportioned lifetime of country, not just your human being, because when the
[Guest 1]: aging starts, then evidence is that your productivity doesn't go up, but mainly these savings drop.
[Guest 1]: And so I think, and we're just missing an apportion of four decades, two decades already
[Guest 2]: gone.
[Guest 2]: And the evidence is around issues that he talked about, such as the savings decline.
[Guest 2]: We don't know enough about what young people do, but it is my view and my opinion that
[Guest 2]: the creative and entrepreneurial capacity that you get in that young population is part
[Guest 2]: of the miracle of what you can do in a younger population, which would be much harder to
[Guest 2]: do in an older population. This is not something that we economists understand enough, but
[Guest 2]: I can't but worry that today in India with the median population in the 20s and 30s is
[Guest 2]: the time when amazing things can happen. And we're really missing this opportunity, that
[Guest 2]: 20 years from now, the same economic policy will yield inferior results compared to what
[Guest 2]: it can do today. Freedom can be so powerful today in opening up the opportunities of the
[Amit Varma]: country.
[Guest 1]: So just to sort of give perspective to my listeners.
[Guest 1]: You know what I mean? Most of Nobel Prize winners got a Nobel Prize for their work in
[Guest 1]: the 20s and 30s.
[Amit Varma]: So just to sort of give perspective to my listeners and tell me if you agree with this
[Amit Varma]: bodily the summation is that for the last 20 years, we've been hearing the phrase demographic
[Amit Varma]: dividend. What does it really mean? What it really means is that India is getting younger
[Amit Varma]: and younger. For example, today, more than 60% of the people in India are born after
[Amit Varma]: the liberalization of 91, something that maybe we older middle aged fogies have a sort of
[Amit Varma]: often don't realize we take it for granted that people have the same frames of reference
[Amit Varma]: as we ask, and what this country being so young means that it's filled with creative
[Amit Varma]: and entrepreneurial energy with dynamism, and societies grow economies grow, where this
[Amit Varma]: energy is allowed a field in which it can express itself. Now, one traditionally over
[Amit Varma]: the last 70 years, we have been too statist and interventionist and haven't allowed these
[Amit Varma]: forces to sort of play themselves out. And that is even worse today, because it's all
[Amit Varma]: going to waste, we have a jobs crisis where you have a million people coming into the
[Amit Varma]: workforce every month, and there aren't enough jobs for them. And therefore, the risk there
[Amit Varma]: is a demographic dividend becomes a demographic disaster. And even ignoring the social consequences
[Amit Varma]: of this in the short run, the economic consequences of this in the long run is that we are a much
[Guest 1]: poorer country than we would otherwise be. Yes, we agree. I'm now 77 years old, and I
[Guest 1]: was disabled. What is my contribution? No, I'm not saving. I'm not investing. This was
[Guest 1]: younger age has a tremendous advantage of sustained high savings, sustained investments,
[Guest 1]: and plus productivity and creativity. And it sort of sort of there's a sweet spot for
[Amit Varma]: development. No, and it feels especially tragic, because given technology, given globalization,
[Amit Varma]: given what is happening, there's an even greater scope for young people to actually make a
[Amit Varma]: difference in the world. And, you know, that opportunity is sort of just being lost.
[Guest 2]: Can I riff on these themes? I want to now say something larger. I want to talk about
[Guest 2]: my own evolution of ideas. As a child, when we studied economics, we were told this story
[Guest 2]: about a growth model, where a country puts labor and capital and gets output. And we
[Guest 2]: were told that you have to mobilize the labor and you have to mobilize the capital. And
[Guest 2]: then it all turns on productivity growth. And you get more and more productivity growth.
[Guest 2]: And that's how you get GDP growth. And this is the simple fable that we were told as children.
[Guest 2]: And increasingly over the years, I have moved away from this way of thinking in pretty radical
[Guest 2]: ways. And let me go through each of these components. Let's start at labor. Okay, it
[Guest 2]: was a complete eye opener to me to gradually understand and realize that actually most
[Guest 2]: of the Indian working age population is just not at work. This is not a small unemployment
[Guest 2]: problem. It is a large non-employment problem. So in the age group 16 to 64, unemployment
[Guest 2]: is that tiny fraction of people who say that they're looking for work and don't have work.
[Guest 2]: A very large number of people are just not even looking for work. They've given up or
[Guest 2]: for whatever else is going on in their lives. They're not in the labor force. Only 40% of
[Guest 2]: India in the age group from 16 to 64 is at work. 60% is not. 60% of adults in the age
[Guest 2]: group 16 to 64 are not at work. There is this army of people out there that are not being
[Guest 2]: harnessed in the economy. So there's no using growth of labor to grow GDP in India. Our
[Guest 2]: problem is that we've just not utilized this labor force. The firms of India are not building
[Guest 2]: businesses that create jobs for most of India. So this is one big realization that there
[Guest 2]: is no GDP growth in India that comes because of increased population. The GDP growth in
[Guest 2]: India will come because firms invest and firms hire more people and the amount available
[Guest 2]: is infinity. There's a very large number of people who are available who are not being
[Guest 2]: harnessed. So in a way, it's both a tragedy and an opportunity that if we could get our
[Guest 2]: act together overnight, there's a lot of labor out there that can be put to work. Similarly
[Guest 2]: on capital. In an old India, in the India that Dr. Kelkar used to grapple with, there
[Guest 2]: was a capital constraint. There was not enough capital. We couldn't build stuff in India
[Guest 2]: because we were stuck with a pool of domestic savings. But today we live in a world of financial
[Guest 2]: globalization. There is essentially infinite capital available in the world. A good business
[Guest 2]: project in India will be able to raise infinite capital in the global market or well-structured
[Guest 2]: financial intermediaries in India will be able to raise capital and deploy it into the
[Guest 2]: local economy. So again, a capital constraint is out. There is no shortage of capital. So
[Guest 2]: there is no constraint on capital. There's no constraint on labor. What gives? Why can't
[Guest 2]: we get GDP up by 5x, by 10x? And then that takes you to what holds us back. It's our
[Guest 2]: institutions. It is all the impediments we put on the minds of firms to organize themselves
[Guest 2]: and use these opportunities. Why do people not put together firms using this infinite
[Guest 2]: pool of labor, using this infinite pool of capital to create output, to sell into India,
[Guest 2]: to sell into the global market? What are all the things hampering the mobilization of labor
[Guest 2]: and capital? Rather than saying that we will save every year and then we will multiply
[Guest 2]: some Indian savings by some I-Corps and we will get an estimate of the impact of incremental
[Guest 2]: savings on Indian GDP, I've just stopped thinking like that. What holds us back is institutions.
[Guest 2]: What holds us back is all the things that interfere with the mind of a manager, with
[Guest 2]: the mind of a firm, with the mind of an entrepreneur, with the mind of a farmer. A farmer is a business.
[Guest 2]: Why do people not use capital and labor, put it to work? That is the way we should think.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, you know, like in your book, one of the sort of articulations which struck
[Amit Varma]: me and, you know, gave me a frame to think about these things was how you describe ways
[Amit Varma]: of thinking about public policy in three different phases, where you say there is a Mark 1 way
[Amit Varma]: of thinking about public policy, which is basically from independence to the early 80s.
[Amit Varma]: And then there is Mark 2, which is from the 80s to 2011. And now we are in a crisis and
[Amit Varma]: we need a Mark 3. And your book essentially is an attempt to get people to think in the
[Amit Varma]: right ways about public policy. Tell me a little bit about what is Mark 1, what is Mark
[Guest 1]: 2, and what went wrong in 2011? You know, one way of thinking about it is
[Guest 1]: that when you're trying to make policies for the, as a meta-policy, the country as a whole,
[Guest 1]: one way of thinking about it by policymakers has been, what are the binding constraints
[Guest 1]: which is not allowing our productive forces to find the expression? When we became independent,
[Guest 1]: we had two problems. That's what our thinkers thought. One is the production structure was
[Guest 1]: distorted because it was colonial. It was linked to metropolitan. For instance, there
[Guest 1]: was a great debate between textiles versus steel, if you remember. And second was that
[Guest 1]: very large transformation takes coordinated investments. And there are missing markets.
[Guest 1]: There's no capital market, as Ajay said, that there was no capital market also. So state
[Guest 1]: had to play a role. That's happened every lagging, or by those late entrants. The famous
[Guest 1]: book by Gharsankaran, which shows that every late comers, the state played a very important
[Guest 1]: role. Even the beautiful book by Boltho and Japan. It was shown in Japan, same thing happened.
[Guest 1]: So state plays a role of to, as it becomes entrepreneur. So it was state-led capitalism.
[Guest 1]: It was still a non-socialist state, we call it socialist state, but it was capitalism.
[Guest 1]: But state, so that was Mark 1, which was binding constraint was non-existent of capital markets
[Guest 1]: or factory markets or missing market. That's what we have said. It gave you a lot of mileage
[Guest 1]: because it was essentially made enormous investment, which led to breaking this colonial stagnation.
[Guest 1]: And it was a remarkable jump in growth rate. But we also dealing with the world economy
[Guest 1]: was a part two. We completely forgot foreign trade plays a transformative, gives a larger
[Guest 1]: possibility set up. There's a beautiful paper by, simple paper by Jagdish Bhagwati on this.
[Guest 1]: Bhagwati's old fashioned economy, some say uses a lot of geometry. If you remember, a
[Guest 1]: simple diagram, it shows what foreign trade does to economy. And that we forgot. And that
[Guest 1]: was he started critiquing and Manmohan started critiquing that, look, you're losing out your
[Guest 1]: world for exchanging your capabilities. And sort of second, I think important insight
[Guest 1]: was that India, you know, we were brought up in the Sujalam, Sofalam, that means a lot
[Guest 1]: of natural resources. We are a natural resource poor country. So you have to augment it with
[Guest 1]: trade. You augment it with trade, also use for augments and non-availability of certain
[Guest 1]: natural resources. So things like this, and second, you also thwarted domestic entrepreneurship
[Guest 1]: through licensing. So whole thing got, so that got, went to a major, major, major crisis.
[Guest 1]: 1991 crisis. But till then, a lot of intellectual work was done. It was available and mark two
[Guest 1]: came, paradigm two came, which involves, no, we can use very creatively. Let's look at
[Guest 1]: world as an opportunity rather than a problem for India. We opened up, and anyway, beautifully
[Guest 1]: it was done. It was done also, both science and art, one can say it is best. They hold
[Guest 1]: that reform period. And that was mark two. But that also now went into problematic, because
[Guest 1]: the biggest constraint on institutions for, if you want a mature market economy, in fact,
[Guest 1]: I have been writing about the mature market economy, and everywhere the constraint was
[Guest 1]: the institutions. So I think binding constraint, as I mentioned, is our non-functioning institutions,
[Guest 1]: because all mature market economies have very, we've all instituted structure and capacity
[Guest 1]: of the state. And, and my sort of problem with state capacity further got stricter because
[Guest 1]: all my working life was in Delhi. For the last 10 years, I, one decade I was in India
[Guest 1]: and I was working with my government in Maharashtra. And I'm a, you don't know what the problems
[Guest 1]: are at state level. And city level is, of course, even worse. So capacities are just
[Guest 1]: not there, and increasingly important problem of building public goods, which are vital,
[Guest 1]: simple things like running a solid waste management. Everywhere institutions are a problem, capacity
[Guest 1]: is a problem. So that's why binding constraints, we came to conclusion, it's really the capacities.
[Guest 2]: I wish to add three things to what he just said. The first is that it's interesting to
[Guest 2]: think about the dates. So as we say in the book, roughly speaking, Mark I is what Nehru
[Guest 2]: and Mahalanobis and others began in 1947. Mark II took off in the late 70s and 80s and
[Guest 2]: saw its full fruition from 91 till 2011. But as Kelkar has emphasized, each of these is
[Guest 2]: the product of an intellectual ferment of the preceding 30 years. So the thought process
[Guest 2]: that Nehru and Mahalanobis put into motion after 1947 was actually the fruit of the labor
[Guest 2]: of the Indian intellectual community from the 1920s onwards. In similar fashion, Manmohan
[Guest 2]: Singh's PhD thesis was 1964. Jagdish Bhagwati and Arun Shourie and T. N. Srinivasan were
[Guest 2]: writing about this stuff from the mid 60s. There are these absolutely remarkable articles
[Guest 2]: by Arun Shourie in the EPW, which are so clear headed about understanding what was going
[Guest 2]: wrong in India in that period. And that laid the intellectual foundations for the great
[Guest 2]: changes that took place from 77 onwards and of course, were amplified from 91 onwards.
[Guest 2]: So I feel we should see the long lags between the development of the ideas and their translation
[Guest 2]: into society more widely. And I think that when people think of dates like 47 and 91,
[Guest 2]: we don't give enough credit for the intellectual ferment that comes before. The second thing
[Guest 2]: I'd like to say is that too often, it is too easy for us to become very critical of the
[Guest 2]: great men and women who came before. And I think that that's not a fair way to do it.
[Guest 2]: And that's really a wrong way to do it. Nehru and Mahalanobis and others were great men.
[Guest 2]: They thought about the world and they exerted a powerful and valuable transformative influence.
[Guest 2]: And with the benefit of hindsight, we see they got some things right and they got some
[Guest 2]: things wrong. So, you know, I feel we should be careful about both extremes. We should
[Guest 2]: not venerate our elders to the point where it becomes a straitjacket, it becomes an ideology
[Guest 2]: and I'm not willing to move away from it. And we should respect what they did. They
[Guest 2]: made a great contribution in similar fashion. We should admire and respect the world of
[Guest 2]: the economic reforms that began in the late 70s and the 80s and the early 90s. And, you
[Guest 2]: know, Dr. Kelkar is always very careful in saying to me that what was done in the 90s
[Guest 2]: was just about as well executed as you could ask. It was this beautiful combination of
[Guest 2]: good politics and good economics. And there were amazing teams and it all came together.
[Guest 2]: And with the benefit of hindsight, of course, we will complain about many things. We will
[Guest 2]: criticize many things. But let's not take away from our respect and our praise and our
[Guest 2]: gratitude for the people who did that.
[Amit Varma]: And we should probably get to talking about, you know, the book per se, but I can't help
[Amit Varma]: sort of thinking aloud and responding to what you just said that it seems to me and there's
[Amit Varma]: a related question then therefore, it seems to me that when you speak of an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: tradition that paved the way for what Nehru and Mahalanobis did and what Manmohan did
[Amit Varma]: later in 91, it strikes me that that is, you know, I get the point in the second instance.
[Amit Varma]: But in the first instance, there were many competing sort of intellectual traditions.
[Amit Varma]: And it almost feels like happenstance to me that Nehru and Mahalanobis, their vision sort
[Amit Varma]: of won out and Nehru happened to be Prime Minister because in a different context, outside
[Amit Varma]: the context of economics, in the context of politics, what I have been exploring over
[Amit Varma]: a series of episodes on sort of Indian politics.
[Amit Varma]: It seems more and more to me that Nehru was in a sense a man apart. If you see the people
[Amit Varma]: who surrounded him, you know, there are strains of greater conservatism from people like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Patel and all the others, Patel, Rajaji, even Rajendra Prasad, you know, there's
[Amit Varma]: a there's that Hindu conservative strand, which is there, there is a free market strand,
[Amit Varma]: which is there. And it just happens to us that the one guy who was Prime Minister happens
[Amit Varma]: to be Fabian socialist. And my related question there is, and I completely agree with you
[Amit Varma]: that with hindsight, it's very easy to judge people. I mean, I'm far more judgmental of
[Amit Varma]: say someone like Indira Gandhi, who really should have known better than of someone like
[Amit Varma]: Nehru who built whatever great institutions we have. But the related question there is
[Amit Varma]: that it seems to me more fair to say that 91 was inevitable, because I am perhaps of
[Amit Varma]: the naive belief that the arc of history does tend towards freedom. And therefore, at some
[Amit Varma]: point, we would have had to move away from the statism and towards greater freedom. And
[Amit Varma]: that seems sort of more inevitable to me in that context. Of course, everything in history
[Amit Varma]: looks inevitable, right?
[Guest 1]: No, I mean, you're not. That's not correct. Look at all the latecomers. Every state play
[Guest 1]: a very important role in industrialization. China, Japan, Germany, Russia, because you're
[Guest 1]: substituting the market. I mean, states substitute capital markets.
[Guest 1]: No, I'm not. I'm not disputing that.
[Guest 1]: So Nehru was, and even if you read the Bombay plan of Adhesar Jalal, very large role it
[Guest 1]: had.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not. I'm not disputing.
[Guest 1]: Or Vishnu Shreyas.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but I'm not litigating the correctness of the approach. All I'm saying is that maybe
[Amit Varma]: it wasn't as inevitable.
[Guest 2]: I think that if you were a dispassionate observer and got into a time machine and looked at
[Guest 2]: the world in 1947, and by the way, I've endlessly debated this with my father, who was a product
[Amit Varma]: of those times.
[Guest 2]: Any other leader in his place would have done the same thing.
[Guest 2]: Yes, that was the intellectual climate of the age. In that age, Hayek was the exception
[Guest 2]: and a fairly statist approach was the norm. Look back at those years. The Great Depression
[Guest 2]: was a disaster.
[Amit Varma]: But you also have Mahatma Gandhi arguing for an entirely different model.
[Guest 2]: But I'm just saying Nehru was a reasonable aggregator of the intellectual climate of
[Guest 2]: that time. Nehru was a real intellectual. He read books. He was personally well connected
[Guest 2]: with all the thinkers of that age. And I think it is hard to argue with the idea that Nehru
[Guest 2]: was reading the times and in that age, we had had the Great Depression. We had had the
[Guest 2]: first globalization collapse in the barbarism of the National Socialist Party and the nationalism
[Guest 2]: and the communism of the USSR. It was disgusting what had happened. Keynes was leading this
[Guest 2]: idea that you need to be a little more social democratic because otherwise, the masses will
[Guest 2]: do nationalism on you.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so this was Nehru reading the world at the time. With the benefit of hindsight,
[Guest 2]: it's different. I think that was a reasonable read of the world at the time.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. I mean, let's kind of get back to the book. What I sort of loved about the
[Amit Varma]: book is that it's almost like a textbook on how to think about public policy before even
[Amit Varma]: how to do public policy. And you start off by laying this analytical toolkit where you
[Amit Varma]: talk specifically about the purpose of the state. And I'm struck by this quote from Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: who's quoted a number of times in your book, where he says, quote, the individual has a
[Amit Varma]: soul but the state is a soulless machine. The state can never be weaned away from violence
[Amit Varma]: to which it owes its existence, stop quote. And, you know, I often sort of keep arguing
[Amit Varma]: every time somebody wants a government intervention that every act of government is an act of
[Amit Varma]: violence. And we have sort of normalize the coercion that the existence of the state implies.
[Amit Varma]: And you have sort of made this the central starting point of your analytical toolkit
[Amit Varma]: that start by accepting that the existence of the state implies great coercion. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: we have to be responsible about where the state should act and where it should not.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate a bit on this?
[Guest 2]: Saeed Khan-This goes back to Max Weber. And again, early 20th century was also the time
[Guest 2]: when Gandhiji was starting to think about these issues. Today, it's not a unusual or
[Guest 2]: controversial idea. As Weber says, the state is a community that achieves a monopoly on
[Guest 2]: violence in a certain territory. That is the state. The state is a tool of violence. And
[Guest 2]: Gandhiji understood that. And you see that coming together in many of his thoughts and
[Guest 2]: his writings and some of his letters to Nehru, and so on. So I feel we should understand
[Guest 2]: that at heart, what is a state? It is the power to coerce. It is the power to inflict
[Guest 2]: violence. It is the power to tell you that you shall do this. And if you don't do this,
[Guest 2]: then I will punish you. That's it. That's the state. It's a monopoly on violence. It
[Guest 2]: is all about violence. And the sooner we recognize that, the better, as you would have seen elsewhere
[Guest 2]: in the book. We also have some paragraphs where we say some people think the state is
[Guest 2]: like a nice NGO. Like, no, please, the state is not a nice NGO. The state is a creature
[Guest 2]: of violence. And our challenge in liberal democracy is how to channel that violence
[Guest 2]: into fair play and justice. So the state is supposed to be a machine that converts coercive
[Guest 2]: power into human welfare. And that's a tall ask. A moment ago, you said that you're an
[Guest 2]: optimist, and you think that the arc of history leads to freedom. I suffer from no such optimism.
[Guest 2]: Okay, I think the history of the 20th century teaches us that political and social catastrophe
[Guest 2]: is always possible. It is only through agency by people like us, by all of us, that we'll
[Guest 2]: ever ever that. So I think of catastrophe as always knocking on our door, the wolf is
[Guest 2]: always at the door. And it is we who have to think, who have to write, who have to work
[Guest 2]: to turn the state into something that is characterized by justice and fairness, because by default,
[Guest 2]: violence is an ugly thing. And it will all too readily turn into something horrible.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, who said that the price of liberty is eternal? Jefferson. Yeah, yeah. No, in
[Amit Varma]: fact, now that you've said this, I agree with you as well. I'm also extremely pessimistic
[Amit Varma]: at the same time, because as Walt Whitman said, I contain multitudes. So allow me both
[Amit Varma]: my optimism and my pessimism. So you know, and therefore having taken this extremely
[Amit Varma]: important insight about the state, which you know, is so obvious, and all of us should
[Amit Varma]: be aware of it at all times, but we normalize the violence and assume that the state is
[Amit Varma]: a benevolent beast that you know, keeping that into account, you guys, therefore posit
[Amit Varma]: that the only reason that the state should act is to prevent market failures. And then
[Amit Varma]: you point out four different kinds of market failures. Can you elaborate a bit upon that?
[Guest 1]: One example, I can think of really public goods and one where market failure is ubiquitous.
[Guest 1]: And we have defined it for why, when it occurs. And that's existed in different levels of
[Guest 1]: the Federation of our country, national level, state level, and city level. And one can see
[Guest 1]: the continuous failure of many supply of public goods has been to my mind, what a motivator
[Guest 1]: for writing this was how to improve the decision making, policymaking when we're dealing with
[Guest 1]: supply of public goods. So because state is wasting resources, value resources into doing
[Guest 1]: something they shouldn't be doing. So in fact, and this came most recently when Nadia and
[Guest 1]: I wrote a, unfortunately, in my world, this was one of the best report is Ministry of
[Guest 1]: Finance for 21st century. In which we pointed out how Ministry of Finance was re-engineered.
[Guest 1]: It was essentially raised by, to us the question was posed to us by Jaswant Singh. Jaswant
[Guest 1]: Singh was a historian. So Jaswant Singh was telling me, is there a good book on Ministry
[Guest 1]: of Finance? So we tried, I tried to dig it up, there's no good book. He said, how strange,
[Guest 1]: I mean, you know, we should, can we think about how it should look like? So he posed
[Guest 1]: a question that triggered a thought. And that's where we came to this two way classification
[Guest 1]: is what's Ministry of Finance should do, which is not doing and what is doing, which it should
[Guest 1]: not do and this kind of separation. So essentially, doing a little better, I mean, I personally
[Guest 1]: have not great ambition for this book. My ambition is that it should go to students
[Guest 1]: of public policy and just improve the outcomes, improve the decision making, improve the policy
[Guest 1]: making over time. Because as Rajesh said, it's going to require the efforts of many
[Guest 1]: others. And this is really, I call it yajna. This is our contribution to the yajna of this
[Guest 1]: great transformation of India.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I should actually clarify here that we are using these dry terms about the state
[Amit Varma]: interfering, but the state acting when there are market failures, but I just want to sort
[Amit Varma]: of state it in simple language, what it really means. I mean, I think of markets as a mechanism
[Amit Varma]: by which society solves its own problems. You know, we fulfill each other's needs through
[Amit Varma]: markets. That's all it is. So when you talk about a state, you know, doing something to
[Amit Varma]: address a market failure, is it then correct to say that what we basically mean is that
[Amit Varma]: there are social problems that are not being somehow for various reasons being solved by
[Amit Varma]: society itself within the existing mechanism. So that's where the state should stand.
[Guest 2]: Economic problems.
[Guest 2]: This is about economics. So to stay on public goods. Okay. I just wish to engage in the
[Guest 2]: three sentence homily here. The words market failure, public goods, asymmetric information,
[Guest 2]: externalities, market power. All these are technical phrases that are overloaded on ordinary
[Guest 2]: English words. And all of us need to be careful about how we use them and what we mean by
[Guest 2]: them. And one of our objectives in this book is to bring a better vocabulary to our discussions
[Guest 2]: because many times these words are being abused. So the essence of a public good is that it
[Guest 2]: is non-rival and it is non-excludable. Non-excludable means that you cannot even in principle exclude
[Guest 2]: a newborn child from the benefit of that public good. And that creates a free rider problem
[Guest 2]: because that newborn child comes along and benefits from the public good, but will not
[Guest 2]: pay anything for it because even if the child did not pay for it, they're still going to
[Guest 2]: benefit from that public good.
[Guest 2]: So it is in the very essence of a public good that there cannot be a private firm that will
[Guest 2]: produce those public goods and have a revenue model where they will raise an invoice on
[Guest 2]: somebody because that's somebody who just refused to pay because it is non-excludable.
[Guest 2]: And that's how societies need to organize themselves around the state who would have
[Guest 2]: a monopoly on violence, who would be able to keep the peace, who would be able to charge
[Guest 2]: taxes and use some of the tax money to produce the public goods. And only the state will
[Guest 2]: do public goods either by production or by financing. Either way, there's really an important
[Amit Varma]: role for the state.
[Amit Varma]: Clean air is a public good, for example.
[Guest 1]: Clean air is a great example. That is very difficult for all over North India. So I've
[Guest 2]: been doing these discussions with my colleague Ila Patnaik at the office that surely there's
[Guest 2]: a better Coasean bargain that the folks in Delhi are willing to pay billions of dollars
[Guest 2]: in return for better air. And what is going on in Punjab is actually the most low value
[Guest 2]: crops are being produced, which is actually a bad use of land and labor in Punjab. It's
[Guest 2]: the worst deal in the world. It's like what we have here is a failure to negotiate. And
[Guest 2]: there just needs to be a way to put it together. And that's what should happen in a liberal
[Guest 2]: democracy. That's what our legislators are supposed to negotiate with each other and
[Guest 2]: find those bargains, whereby the folks all over North India will pay some taxes and the
[Guest 2]: agriculture policies will be reset. And then the air quality will improve. These are contracts
[Guest 2]: that are infeasible for us to find those negotiations by ourselves. And that's where just the simple
[Guest 2]: insistence on freedom and people negotiating with each other doesn't work. And that's why
[Guest 2]: we need this intermediary called the state.
[Amit Varma]: So let me sort of unpack it for my listeners. And this particular example is probably too
[Amit Varma]: more granular than I intended to go. I intended to stay with the broad ideas, but nevertheless
[Amit Varma]: is very illustrative of a lot of problems. So I'll sort of unpack it a bit. Now, I, for
[Amit Varma]: example, had an episode in the past on the smog in Delhi. And one of the main reasons
[Amit Varma]: why the smog in Delhi gets so bad around October, November, is that the farmers are burning
[Amit Varma]: the leftover of their rice crop at that time, and they have to burn it because they have
[Amit Varma]: no option. That's the cheapest possible way out for them. And at one level, it's a state
[Amit Varma]: capacity thing. There aren't enough policemen to really be able to stop them. You also see
[Amit Varma]: various perverse incentives come into play. Punjab is arid. Why are they growing rice,
[Amit Varma]: which is water intensive? They are doing it because number one, they're incentivized by
[Amit Varma]: minimum support prices set by the government on rice, which causes them to grow rice even
[Amit Varma]: when they normally would not if they got signals from the marketplace. And two, because there
[Amit Varma]: is free electricity for agriculture, and therefore they can use their bore wells to pump up as
[Amit Varma]: much water as they need. So they end up producing rice. So that is, you know, that's an aside,
[Amit Varma]: but at one level, that's part of the failure. But the larger question remains, even if this
[Amit Varma]: was not the case in Punjab wasn't arid and it made sense to grow rice anyway. So now
[Amit Varma]: the issue here is it's also a political economy problem, because the people of Delhi want
[Amit Varma]: fresh air. And but the government of Delhi is powerless to do anything about it because
[Amit Varma]: it is farmers in Punjab who are causing this problem. And the government of Punjab cannot
[Amit Varma]: do anything against the farmers because the farmers are an important vote bank. Now what
[Amit Varma]: you meant by Coasean solutions, and you of course elaborated on this in your book, is
[Amit Varma]: that a Coasean solution would be that let's say that I am producing something in my house
[Amit Varma]: which pollutes your house, which is a neighbouring house in some way. One way of solving this
[Amit Varma]: is saying that you are a victim and the state should stop in and make me stop. Another way
[Amit Varma]: is that because both people have property rights, I own my property, you own yours,
[Amit Varma]: we can actually bargain, either I can pay you something to put up with the pollution,
[Amit Varma]: or you can pay me to stop. And because every voluntary exchange makes both people better
[Amit Varma]: off, you actually have a situation where both people are made better off instead of the
[Amit Varma]: state intervening in a clumsy manner, which could even leave both people worse off in
[Amit Varma]: certain cases. So what it is what you're saying that the Delhi Punjab situation with the smog
[Amit Varma]: is that a Coasean solution isn't really possible, because how do you get, you know, who negotiates
[Amit Varma]: with whom and how do you drive a bargain? And therefore, the state needs to step in
[Amit Varma]: what are the possible solutions? Like this is a market failure.
[Guest 2]: Can I just not go into the rabbit hole? But right now, I just want to say, all of market
[Guest 2]: failure fits under this concept. We are not able to find ready ways in which individuals
[Guest 2]: will talk to each other, negotiate with each other, make beneficial business deals, and
[Guest 2]: come up with good solutions. So the role of the state is where there is a failure of negotiation.
[Guest 2]: That's a recurring theme. So amongst the economists, we say, market failure is a situation with
[Guest 2]: market power or asymmetric information, externalities, or public goods. And there's a section in
[Guest 2]: the book, where we come at each of these from a negotiation point of view. And I think that's
[Guest 2]: a useful way to think about it, that our first port of call should always be private people
[Guest 2]: talking to each other, negotiating deals, making each other better off, because when
[Guest 2]: you and I negotiate, we'll always find a better answer than some coercive third party intervening
[Guest 2]: inside our life and saying thou shalt do X. But there is a class of problems where negotiations
[Guest 2]: don't work so well. And that is the role of the state. So that's a nice, unifying theme
[Guest 2]: to think about. Why do you have a state? Where should the state intervene?
[Amit Varma]: And to add a nuance to that, sometimes the state gets in the way of negotiation. For
[Amit Varma]: example, farmers aren't allowed to sell agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes. So if
[Amit Varma]: I'm a farmer, and I want to sell my land to Reliance, I'm not allowed to negotiate with
[Amit Varma]: them. Otherwise, we would have sorted it out. So and then the state further intervenes saying
[Amit Varma]: because you can't negotiate, we will expropriate your land and give it to the big company.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas a negotiation itself should have been.
[Guest 2]: So this negotiation perspective of thinking of humans as rational, sentient, capable beings
[Guest 2]: who will negotiate with each other and who are not stupid, who are not children, you
[Guest 2]: don't need a nanny to take care of what they're doing. And, you know, a lot can be done in
[Guest 2]: society by people talking to each other. And let's respect the capabilities of people to
[Guest 2]: talk to each other to negotiate with each other. And I think also what's happened in
[Guest 2]: India is that because of this long tradition of an interfering state, I think we've had
[Guest 2]: a certain infantilization of the people that the people have stopped using their organizing
[Guest 2]: and negotiating muscle. We've had a shriveling of civil society, because the state rushes
[Guest 2]: in on every problem.
[Amit Varma]: And we see ourselves as subjects, not citizens.
[Guest 2]: So I think that in the long run, in a steady state point of view, that the retreat of the
[Guest 2]: state from a lot of this will actually create more civil society will create more social
[Guest 2]: capital, it will create significant conversations and discussions between people who are otherwise
[Guest 2]: not even talking to each other and just looking up, trying to wield the coercive power of
[Guest 2]: the state to hit at each other.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So can you briefly take me through these four different kinds of market failures
[Amit Varma]: and does Delhi in a sense illustrate all of them? Because externalities, you have, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the pollution, which is an externality created by certain people which hit certain
[Amit Varma]: others is a negative externality. So yeah, that's a market failure. Asymmetric information
[Amit Varma]: could have been the case if the people of Delhi were simply not aware if they didn't
[Amit Varma]: have the information that the pollution is so harmful to them.
[Guest 2]: The best place to focus on asymmetric information is like a consumer, you're going to a shop,
[Guest 2]: you're buying a strip of paracetamol, it's unreasonable to expect the consumer to take
[Guest 2]: those medicines and put them into a testing lab and verify that the tablets are actually
[Guest 2]: sound and not counterfeited. So, you know, think of this asymmetric information to the
[Guest 2]: point where it becomes impossible to contract, because the burden of verification on small
[Guest 2]: value transactions is too great. If I was buying 1 million strips of paracetamol, I
[Guest 2]: would hire a statistician and do random sampling and get them tested in a lab. But if I'm buying
[Guest 2]: one strip, it's really an unreasonable burden to cross. And that's where you should think
[Amit Varma]: about that asymmetric information.
[Amit Varma]: And aside for my listeners, there's a very good book out recently called Bottle of Lies,
[Amit Varma]: which talks about the pharmaceutical industry in India and the kind of fraudulent behaviour
[Amit Varma]: which goes on here in the absence of the sort of regulation the US has and it's really scary
[Amit Varma]: because a lot of the over-the-counter medicines that you buy may not even work and worse may
[Amit Varma]: harm you. So that's externalities, asymmetric information. You also talk about market power
[Guest 1]: by which you basically mean monopolies.
[Guest 1]: Pharma is not as bad in India as everywhere, it's a pretty big problem when it happens.
[Guest 1]: You see, the whole concept of sovereignty breaks down. Me as a consumer, when I, first,
[Guest 1]: I don't know which drug to use. It's the doctor who's intermediary, tell me what to use. Then
[Guest 1]: the argument is generic. Now, I don't know as a consumer, but generic is really going
[Guest 1]: to perform as good as the branded. Now, out of which brand? So, consumer sovereignty breakdown
[Guest 1]: is happening in United States. So, it's not just India, I mean, there's a ubiquitous breakdown
[Guest 1]: of consumer sovereignty in this business. It's the same to the hospitals. Now, I went
[Guest 1]: to recently a procedure. I didn't have a choice which strain to use. I mean, I'm not an expert,
[Guest 1]: so I had to guide it and price difference is very large, but so it was not as if that
[Guest 1]: prices determine my choice, but choice was because I didn't have the adequate information
[Guest 1]: on what is pros and cons of different alternatives. So, consumers, complete failure, I mean, there's
[Guest 1]: no consumer sovereignty. It's a ubiquitous failure of, this is a great problem in UK,
[Guest 1]: USA, everywhere on health policy. So, not just India, so that book is, there's a difference
[Guest 1]: to that book also. I'm not taking, with some grain of salt, because what has happened,
[Guest 1]: it was also attacked by US pharma industry against Indian generics, which is challenging
[Guest 1]: their markets. But some parts are true, but some part I will vary about taking everything
[Guest 1]: what the book said. But basic point is ubiquitous everywhere, not just India.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. But as you point out, that while the problem is ubiquitous, there are different
[Amit Varma]: incentives at play in different places. Like in your book, you have a section on why HMOs
[Amit Varma]: in the UK are a much better institutional way of tackling public health and healthcare
[Amit Varma]: than the way the Indian system works. But that's a different matter. And maybe we'll
[Amit Varma]: get to it later, just to, you know, finish off this thing on market failures. You said
[Amit Varma]: there are four kinds of market failures, externalities, like pollution, asymmetric information, like
[Amit Varma]: the pharma situation, market power, which, you know, monopolies and so on, and public
[Amit Varma]: goods.
[Guest 2]: And what I like about this is this is a great toolkit. Okay, so by default in India, you
[Guest 2]: are in too many discussions and debates, where somebody is saying, let's use the government
[Guest 2]: to do X. And it will be so great if more of us will put it into this little classification
[Guest 2]: system and say, is it a market failure? Are we convinced that there's a market failure
[Guest 2]: or not? So straight away, I think there's a value added right here, that there are lots
[Guest 2]: of things that the Indian state is doing, which are not related to market failure. And
[Guest 2]: you know, that's a good case for getting the government out of our life.
[Amit Varma]: So your fundamental heuristic is that, look, can society do it on its own? If it can, we
[Amit Varma]: don't go there. We only go there for problems at that level, where there is a market failure,
[Guest 1]: society can't do it.
[Guest 1]: You know, if you look at my book, look at the comments, Professor Avinash Dixit, he
[Guest 1]: says this is the most important thing the book tells you, what you should not do. I
[Guest 1]: mean, you should not intervene in the best policy. But I think I would tell you, I mean,
[Guest 1]: the best chapter of this book is his policy. That's the best chapter.
[Amit Varma]: That's a really good chapter. And I enjoyed that. We'll sort of come to that. Tell me
[Amit Varma]: about the, like, you then pointed out that, okay, we only intervene when there's a market
[Amit Varma]: failure. Now you say that there are three ways in which we can intervene, the three
[Guest 1]: pillars of intervention, as you call them. Can you elaborate a bit on those?
[Guest 1]: You see, the three pillars, government can either produce, the service, mines, supplies,
[Guest 1]: if there's a supply problem, or finance, to produce, and third, regulate. There are three
[Guest 1]: different pillars. My personal choice is the government should shy away as much as possible
[Guest 1]: in producing part of it. Because the government is a very inefficient producer.
[Amit Varma]: And also, like you've pointed out with various examples, there are conflicts between when
[Guest 1]: the government is producing and regulating at the same time.
[Guest 1]: Exactly, exactly. When you become player, umpire, and judge. Every role, and that's
[Guest 1]: where, in fact, both Ajay and I wrote a piece on privatization. And this is one of the major
[Guest 1]: arguments we have made. The reason is that this combination of these three roles completely
[Guest 1]: destroys the whole market. The government is player, arbitrator, and umpire.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, your conclusion, therefore, is that it is okay sometimes to finance, and it is
[Amit Varma]: okay sometimes to regulate. It is usually not okay to produce.
[Guest 2]: I just want to say how my opinions have shifted on some of this. If you'd asked me 20 years
[Guest 2]: ago, I would have been clear-eyed and confident that, yeah, get out of producing and do regulating
[Guest 2]: and financing. I think one of the arguments of this book is that there is a generic thing
[Guest 2]: called state capacity. And when there is low state capacity, this runs deep, and this hampers
[Guest 2]: everything that you do. A state that is inept at producing is also a state that is inept
[Guest 2]: at regulating is also a state that is inept at financing.
[Guest 2]: So our problems run deep. I think certainly I was way too optimistic about our ability
[Guest 2]: to do regulation well. We actually do regulation very badly. So we have to worry more about
[Guest 2]: these things. Similarly, financing. Many of us have thought a lot about things like education
[Guest 2]: vouchers, and at first blush, we're very positive about it. But you do have to reckon with the
[Guest 2]: Indian state capacity crisis that are we able to build an organization that will actually
[Guest 2]: find the household correctly, the money will not just be embezzled, and the money will
[Guest 2]: be correctly and efficiently transmitted. As an example, consider RSBY, the health insurance
[Guest 2]: system. When it first came up, I was very supportive. But now with the benefit of hindsight,
[Guest 2]: we see RSBY has actually not worked well. There is large scale insurance fraud all over
[Guest 2]: the country. So state capacity is a barrier in everything. And low capacity government
[Guest 2]: will do everything wrong. It will not know how to wage war. It will not know how to do
[Guest 2]: intelligence operations. It will not know how to run a voucher system. It will not know
[Guest 2]: how to gather statistics. It will not know how to make a budget. So that fundamental
[Guest 2]: streak of low capability runs all across everything that the Indian state does is done badly.
[Guest 1]: In this context, it just occurred to me, I mean, listen to, in our next edition, if
[Guest 1]: it comes, we should write about this type 1 and type 2 errors and what kind of problems
[Guest 1]: occurs in the state. Why we should be wary? And what are the sources of these problems
[Guest 1]: and which are likely to be more often and how to go about it? We should probably write
[Amit Varma]: on this.
[Amit Varma]: That's also, I think later in your book, you talk about public-private partnerships, PPPs.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out that how people assume that because we don't have state capacity, we'll
[Amit Varma]: just do a partnership.
[Guest 2]: Just to be careful not to make it sound like we're the smarty pants. Dr. Kelkar and I were
[Guest 2]: equally enthusiastic about those positions in the 90s. And it's for the benefit of hindsight
[Guest 2]: that we understand that actually these failures run deep, that a government that is bad at
[Guest 2]: contracting, the government is bad at drafting contracts, negotiating contracts, managing
[Guest 2]: contracts, handling disputes, making payments. All these fundamental homeostatic processes
[Guest 2]: of the Indian state are broken. And then, yeah, you'll do badly when it comes to having
[Guest 2]: a PPP vendor to build a bridge or to build a power transmission system and so on. So,
[Amit Varma]: these things will go wrong.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, to finish your point, your point there was that just because you don't have
[Amit Varma]: state capacity to produce a PPP is not the solution because you also need state capacity
[Amit Varma]: to regulate and that has been a failure of ours. You also have a great chapter on state
[Amit Varma]: capacity itself where you talk about how the sort of solutions you should be thinking about
[Amit Varma]: with a weak state capacity are very different from what, say, Sweden would do with a strong
[Amit Varma]: state capacity, because you can do so much less and you do it so much more inefficiently.
[Amit Varma]: You therefore have to limit the interventions that you do. I think you quoted someone as
[Amit Varma]: saying that it's almost a sort of, I think you quoted Kaushik Basu as saying that it's
[Amit Varma]: a libertarianism.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, Kaushik Basu's priceless quote, there is libertarianism of necessity, and there
[Guest 2]: is libertarianism of choice. And he says in India, we all have to be libertarian because
[Guest 2]: we do not have a well functioning state.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so since the state can't do anything anyway, let it get the hell out except where
[Amit Varma]: it's absolutely required. Let's sort of give a context to all of this by talking about
[Amit Varma]: what you call a long history of failure. That's one of your chapter headings, the sort of
[Amit Varma]: the various basic ways in which we have failed by misunderstanding state intervention, by
[Amit Varma]: misunderstanding, by ignoring unintended consequences, and especially your important insight, which
[Amit Varma]: is that, as you put it, quote, a coercive agent is poorly placed at solving failures
[Amit Varma]: of negotiations, top quote, which you were talking about earlier. Elaborate a bit on
[Guest 2]: that.
[Guest 2]: We were saying a moment ago that if you think that at the heart of market failure is a failure
[Guest 2]: to negotiate, and all you have is a coercive agent. Now, let's bring these two things together.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so start from Max Weber and Gandhiji and others, and you understand, actually,
[Guest 2]: all the state can do is coerce. And what the people have not been able to do by themselves
[Guest 2]: is negotiate. How do you use a coercive agent to solve inadequacies of negotiation? It's
[Guest 2]: not entirely clear and obvious. And a little bit of rumination around this will again help
[Guest 2]: us see how it's a difficult job to build a state and run a state and do this well. Like
[Guest 2]: the people were not able to negotiate with each other and figure out a solution to Punjab
[Guest 2]: and North India and so on. And it is hard for the legislators at the union government,
[Guest 2]: at the state government to all come together and figure out what kind of bargains will
[Guest 2]: be done, which will actually reflect the best interests of the people and will add value.
[Guest 2]: While that's a nice way to think about it and say it, it's actually extremely difficult
[Guest 2]: to do it. So I think this is a very valuable combination, a juxtaposition. By the way,
[Guest 2]: this is originally from Suyash Rai, that all you can do as state is to coerce. And the
[Guest 2]: problem that you have to solve is failures of negotiation. When you put these two together,
[Guest 2]: you see that this is going to be really hard. How can I add value? It is really hard to
[Amit Varma]: add value.
[Amit Varma]: And from this, what follows is, again, I was very struck by the phrase of your subheading
[Amit Varma]: here, quote, the impossibility of paternalistic policy. Stop quote, why is paternalism impossible?
[Guest 2]: In the sense, why it can never work?
[Guest 2]: In so many ways, paternalism is like the state is like my parent, but my parent knows me.
[Guest 2]: My parent knows a lot about me. My parent cares about my welfare. The state is a coercive
[Guest 2]: agent. The states tend to amass power and the individuals inside states relish amassing
[Guest 2]: power. They don't particularly care about my welfare. The state doesn't even know my
[Guest 2]: preferences and so on. We could go on and on. So, this whole my-bop conception that
[Guest 2]: the state is like some replacement for a parent is really something we should be skeptical
[Guest 1]: about.
[Guest 2]: How have you seen this transition?
[Guest 1]: No, I mean, the final government in my-bop circle is ingrained in our political class.
[Guest 1]: They think they have sort of do everything themselves and they know everything what needs
[Guest 1]: to be done. And given India, which is really a very large country, I mean, it's impossible
[Guest 1]: to do, to be sitting in Delhi, to know what the problems in Cochin are. And can't take
[Guest 1]: the view that I know everything about Cochin problem or for that matter, Mantrala in Mumbai
[Guest 1]: know what's the problem in Sangli or in Usmanabad. So, there are whole problems, different levels
[Guest 1]: of government where the sort of, if it's hierarchical terms, the higher levels of government
[Guest 1]: think that they know everything what the lower levels want. And that's why you get a simple
[Guest 1]: thing like, I'm not giving my mind exam, like Pune and even Pune. The alignment of Pune
[Guest 1]: metro, the Pune citizens were never consulted properly. So, because they knew, because why
[Guest 1]: because Shri Jain did in Delhi. And with all due respect to Mr. Shri Jain, he has a marvellous
[Guest 1]: job, but he's not God. And unfortunately, some Pune citizens lost the battle because
[Guest 1]: they didn't have the voice. So, the paternalism like this, and I think it's ubiquitous, it
[Guest 1]: happens everywhere that I know.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, you make a case later in the book for decentralization, also more and more
[Guest 1]: decentralization principle of subsidiarity.
[Guest 2]: That's one reason. That's one important lesson.
[Guest 2]: I want to add to this discussion. I feel that it's good to have an intuition that the fundamental
[Guest 2]: DNA of a firm is to make money. Okay, so firms can layer all kinds of other objectives and
[Guest 2]: you can try to have better governance and you can try to have regulation and all that.
[Guest 2]: But we understand and we accept and we respect the fact that at heart firms exist to make
[Guest 2]: money and that is the fundamental driver and firms will always come back to make money.
[Guest 2]: Okay, I think in similar fashion, we should have a parallel intuition that the state is
[Guest 2]: a community that has monopolized violence. And that community seeks to amass power and
[Guest 2]: the fundamental DNA of the state is to achieve more and more power over its subjects. And
[Guest 2]: the puzzle of being a humane, civilized, liberal democracy is how to push back against that
[Guest 2]: inherent DNA of states.
[Guest 2]: By default, states will extend themselves. By default, states will increase their power.
[Guest 2]: States will try to amass power. The state is a community that amasses power. Don't think
[Guest 2]: about it as an institution. Think of it as a bunch of people. It's a bunch of people
[Guest 2]: that wish to lord over you and me. And they will use every opportunity, every situation,
[Guest 2]: every excuse to gain power and make you the subject and make me the subject. And once
[Guest 2]: we start seeing the state like that, I think we will become more hesitant, we'll become
[Guest 2]: more skeptical and I think that'll be good. So it is the citizenry that has to constantly
[Guest 2]: push back and say, no, I will not be ruled. And that is the way we will get to a civilized
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, on the subject of different approaches to the state, I'm reminded of this quote by
[Amit Varma]: David Bowes, where he basically says in an American context, conservatives want the state
[Amit Varma]: to be your daddy. They want to tell you what to do and what not to do. Liberals want the
[Amit Varma]: state to be your mommy. They want to feed you and clothe you and all of that. He means
[Amit Varma]: left liberals, of course, in an American context. And libertarians want to treat you like an
[Amit Varma]: adult. They just want the state to leave you alone.
[Guest 2]: On a side humor, I think Churchill said that dogs look up on us, cats look down on us.
[Guest 2]: Pigs treat us as equals. I like pigs.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so in your narrative so far, which is just so beautifully logical and everyone
[Amit Varma]: must read this book, but in your narrative so far, you've spoken about the first principle
[Amit Varma]: about why the state should intervene only when society is not being able to solve its
[Amit Varma]: problems itself, which is market failure. You've spoken about the three pillars of intervention
[Amit Varma]: that you can produce, you can regulate, and you can actually finance or fund something.
[Amit Varma]: You also then go on to talk about the various common reasons of policy failure, why public
[Amit Varma]: policy doesn't work. Can you take me through that a bit?
[Guest 2]: At heart, there is a principal agent problem. So we the people vote in elections, and we
[Guest 2]: aspire that our legislators are our agents. But we have very little time and attention
[Guest 2]: to understand their daily actions. And they may do things that are not in our best interest.
[Guest 2]: But that keeps on going. Then the legislators vote to choose a cabinet and the cabinet may
[Guest 2]: not work for the best interest of the legislators. The cabinet has a minister who may not work
[Guest 2]: in the best interest of the cabinet. The minister has a secretary who may not work in the best
[Guest 2]: interest of the minister. And you see, it's so diffused, it goes on and on. So basically,
[Guest 2]: in one heart of the problem is principal agent problems. The state is an entire administrative
[Guest 2]: machinery that has coercive power. And it is all too easy to engage in corruption. And
[Guest 2]: when I say corruption, I don't mean suitcases of cash. I don't just mean suitcases of cash.
[Guest 2]: I mean, really doing things that are in your own self interest, rather than doing things
[Guest 2]: that are good for the people, and pursuing self aggrandizement and earning political
[Guest 2]: favors. This is really pervasive in the state. So that's why states fail.
[Amit Varma]: So, if I can just read out sort of the four points that you made about this, which is
[Amit Varma]: that the state is not necessary in a situation where freedom works well, doing nothing is
[Amit Varma]: the best option. That where policies sometimes go wrong is if there is a market failure,
[Amit Varma]: but the politics goes wrong in the sense where the search for the right intervention is hijacked
[Amit Varma]: by special interest groups, which we'll talk about in a moment, because we need to talk
[Amit Varma]: about public choice theory a bit more. Third, where there is a market failure, and the objectives
[Amit Varma]: of policymakers was sound, but the design of the intervention was wrong. And fourth,
[Amit Varma]: where the correct intervention was attempted, but the implementation itself failed because
[Amit Varma]: of state capacity or sort of other reasons. And therefore, you outline and that there
[Amit Varma]: are three key steps in policy thinking, which we've sort of discussed so far, which is,
[Amit Varma]: one, are we facing a market failure? If not, don't act. Two, does the proposed intervention
[Amit Varma]: address this market failure? And three, do we have the ability to effectively implement
[Amit Varma]: the proposed intervention? Now, what you also then point out in your next chapter is, okay,
[Amit Varma]: we've got so far, but you talk about the various reasons things go wrong in terms of the constraints
[Amit Varma]: of five constraints, which public policymakers always have to confront. Can you elaborate
[Amit Varma]: a bit on this?
[Guest 2]: If you were in this, it would be really hard. If you were senior bureaucrat, or you were
[Guest 2]: a politician, things would be really hard. The five constraints we run through are, there's
[Guest 2]: an information constraint, we just don't measure India enough. And so we don't know what is
[Guest 2]: going wrong. And we don't know what to do. There is a knowledge constraint. We're not
[Guest 2]: standing on an adequate body of knowledge, so that we can figure out where is the market
[Guest 2]: failure, go upstream, find the root cause, find the correct intervention. Then the third
[Guest 2]: is a resource constraint, which is you would want skilled, capable people and money to
[Guest 2]: be able to go do the things that we want to do. Then there is an administrative constraint,
[Guest 2]: which is we don't have the organization structures, the basic processes of government in India
[Guest 2]: today don't work. The homeostatic processes of government is there is an HR process, there
[Guest 2]: is a contracting process, there's a finance process, these processes are malfunctioning
[Guest 2]: badly. And finally, there is a voter rationality constraint, which is that we should not be
[Guest 2]: too optimistic about how liberal democracy works, because it is not efficient for most
[Guest 2]: voters to take time and trouble in understanding policy questions. There's no shortcut. So
[Guest 2]: some people think that we should just ask the people, we should run opinion polls, we
[Guest 2]: should run referendums. And that doesn't work very well. There's no running away from building
[Guest 2]: the republic from building a representative democracy, and doing all the hard work of
[Guest 2]: creating accountability mechanisms, feedback loops, that incentivize various elements of
[Guest 2]: the system that overcome these principal agent problems. But we should go into this knowing
[Amit Varma]: it's hard.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, the term for the last of these constraints of voter rationality constraint
[Amit Varma]: in public choice theory is rational ignorance, where every voter knows that like the election
[Amit Varma]: is not likely to be decided by that one vote. So the benefit from that vote is very, very
[Amit Varma]: little, but the cost of making an informed vote of understanding economics of understanding
[Amit Varma]: public policy, though all voters should read this book, but the cost of it is so high that
[Amit Varma]: it is rational for them to be ignorant, which becomes a problem in a democracy. What you
[Amit Varma]: know, another concept that I think deserves to be more widely known, and which comes into
[Amit Varma]: the third of these constraints that you mentioned, the resource constraint is a marginal cost
[Amit Varma]: of public funds. And and this is something I think every Indian citizen, especially those
[Amit Varma]: who favor government spending in this area or that should kind of be aware of. Can you
[Guest 1]: explain?
[Guest 1]: You see, one of the insight of tax theory of public finance is that most taxes distort
[Guest 1]: relative prices, either relative price in terms of work or leisure or different price
[Guest 1]: of products or services. So, the theory is that the best tax is a pooled tax, that means
[Guest 1]: per head tax is least distorted, but that is not possible for many other reason because
[Guest 1]: mainly because it is a difficult to administer and considered as a regressive. So, once as
[Guest 1]: soon as you introduce taxes, you distort prices. And the one insight in theory is that the
[Guest 1]: welfare cost of distortion are logarithmic, that means they are not directly, where would
[Guest 1]: they go exponentially. So, the cost of any financing, which depends on taking money from
[Guest 1]: a private agent, that goes up increasingly. This is on just on the collection side. The
[Guest 1]: further distortion or cost increase because of implementation inefficiencies. So, there
[Guest 1]: is further loss. So, if you take all these losses, once we computed roughly for every
[Guest 1]: one rupee you collect, the total loss to society of truly distortion inefficiencies, roughly
[Guest 1]: three times more. So, that is why one has to be very mindful that, you know, sometimes
[Guest 1]: very easy to finance it, but financing means there are positive costs and positive costs
[Guest 1]: can be very, very high. That is the reason that mindful of this mild cost of public funds
[Guest 1]: is very important, thinking about the intervention. But can I come back to earlier problem?
[Amit Varma]: Please, please, yeah.
[Guest 1]: We just, you know, trigger a thought, multiple objectives and inefficient. I will give you
[Guest 1]: a concrete example of, we used to have old eras of planning era, we used to look at Bureau
[Guest 1]: of Industrial Costs and Prices, which I used to chair. And one of the tasks was functional
[Guest 1]: pricing. Now, because all the BICB staff was very committed and good people, but when you
[Guest 1]: are deciding about prices, the system of data collection data was so wrong, that we used
[Guest 1]: to create either prices were too low, which would mean the markets, there will be complete
[Guest 1]: absence of that product, it can't be vital product. Thing like vaccines, I don't know,
[Guest 1]: you are too young. Those days, God forbid, if there is a dog bite, people had to go from
[Guest 1]: places to places, sometimes just to get that vaccine, vaccine dog bite. So, there was a
[Guest 1]: committee was set up and I was asked to look into it. So, we looked at it. Now, what is
[Guest 1]: the problem? First, what is the essential drug? What is essential to you, may not be
[Guest 1]: essential to me or somebody else. So, there is one ambiguity, we don't know what we are
[Guest 1]: trying to regulate. Second, at what, we don't know the supply response. So, if we keep it
[Guest 1]: too high, too low, what will happen? Third, you also have the objective of improving consumer
[Guest 1]: sovereignty, which means you want to move away from branded, because the argument was
[Guest 1]: branded. So, various objectives or multiple objectives, only one is to measure prices.
[Guest 1]: So, that was how we got it wrong. So, you have to then unmindfully different, I will
[Guest 1]: not go over what we went to do it. But it was a classic problem of this policymaking,
[Guest 1]: information constraint, knowledge constraint, because you didn't have the knowledge. Third
[Guest 1]: is the implementation constraints, because after all the price administration was done
[Guest 1]: by BICB sitting in Delhi, we had no notion what it means a supply in Coimbatore or in
[Guest 1]: Chhattisgarh. So, everything was done and policy was being made. So, that's a one example
[Guest 1]: in which it was failure of all the, and you need to require public policy, because there
[Guest 1]: is a reason for public policy, which is market failure. But it was, it's like, making problem
[Guest 1]: is a problematic, you have to take into account the, and one instrument and multiple objectives.
[Amit Varma]: Which is another point, in fact, that you make later in the book, that one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that policymakers should be aware is that you should have one instrument for one objective.
[Guest 2]: And if you can,
[Guest 2]: Can I just stay on marginal cost of public funds? It's useful to think that there are
[Guest 2]: three boxes that work together to produce that number. Okay, so one is tax policy. Do
[Guest 2]: you have a rational tax system, the ideal tax system, as he just said, is a poll tax
[Guest 2]: that each human being pays x rupees a year. And after that, there are no distortions to
[Guest 2]: anybody's incentives. This is not politically feasible. The real world taxation system that
[Guest 2]: we have will always introduce distortions. For example, taxation of corporations is a
[Guest 2]: certain amount of double taxation. So, you and I have incentives to not incorporate.
[Guest 2]: And we would rather work as individuals or proprietorships or partnerships, even when
[Guest 2]: these are inefficient forms of organization, because we want to avoid the corporate form,
[Guest 2]: because it is being double taxed. Now, that's a cost to society, because we are less productive
[Guest 2]: as a consequence of the aversion to incorporate. So, there are distortions introduced by tax
[Guest 2]: policy. Then there are distortions introduced by tax administration. We all suffer record
[Guest 2]: keeping costs, tax filing costs, we suffer raids by income tax inspectors, okay, and
[Guest 2]: so on. All those things impose a cost upon the economy. There's the litigation, there
[Guest 2]: is arbitration, all sorts of things happen. All that is the box called tax administration.
[Guest 2]: And that imposes a cost upon society. And then the third is the debt management, that
[Guest 2]: when a government runs deficits, how does it finance itself and what is happening in
[Guest 2]: India is effectively the debt management is one more layer of taxation, where government
[Guest 2]: bonds are being forced upon financial firms. And effectively, if you are so imprudent as
[Guest 2]: to hold money in banks, then you're being taxed, because there is a whole financial
[Guest 2]: repression system whereby bonds at artificially low interest rates are being thrust upon the
[Guest 2]: banks. And that's one more layer of taxation. All these inefficiencies are the source of
[Guest 2]: the marginal cost of public funds. When the government of India spends one rupee, each
[Guest 2]: of these layers is inducing a cost upon the people. And while it's hard to estimate, our
[Guest 2]: opinion over the years is that we've coalesced around a number about three rupees. We don't
[Guest 2]: want to sound scientific. It's probably 2.5, it's probably 3.5. But a good thumb rule to
[Guest 2]: keep in our mind is three rupees that for each one rupee that the government spends,
[Guest 2]: GDP goes down by three rupees. It's a nice valuable way to think and what that means
[Guest 2]: is that if ever you're planning to think of doing a government expenditure, you got to
[Guest 2]: be sure that the value to society is at least three. It's a nice test that do things which
[Amit Varma]: will add value.
[Guest 1]: So that is serious bang for the buck.
[Guest 1]: That's serious bang for the buck.
[Guest 1]: Number for the expression bang for the buck. What bang you want?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So if it's something where there is no option like clean air, for example, or
[Amit Varma]: there's a public health epidemic, then you know, that's one thing.
[Guest 2]: And think about it, hypothetical, I'm just going to make up wild numbers. I have no idea
[Guest 2]: about the numerical estimates, but it was probably going to cost 5000 crore to solve
[Guest 2]: the North India air quality problem. I'm making up a number, it will involve setting up a
[Guest 2]: statistical system of air quality measurements, some regulatory system, and some large scale
[Guest 2]: revamp of agricultural policy, some side payments. Bottom line, there'll be some 5000 crore that
[Guest 2]: I involved, 10,000 crore that I involved.
[Guest 2]: So the 3x rule will say the gains should be a minimum 30,000 crore. Now the gains are
[Guest 2]: easily 300,000 crore. Because if you think of the health of the entire North India, one
[Guest 2]: of the most densely populated regions of the whole world, the gains are easily 300,000
[Guest 2]: crore. So yeah, it's a 10 to 1 bang for the buck.
[Guest 2]: So that's like saying that, yeah, we should think of using 5 to 10,000 crore rupees of
[Guest 2]: public money to solve the North India air quality crisis because it meets the 3x test.
[Guest 2]: But there are many, many other kinds of expenditure of the Indian state where you don't pass the
[Guest 2]: 3x test. So it's good for all of us to think public money is not free. It's not even one
[Guest 2]: is to one. In fact, it is three is to one. There is an instinct in many parts of the
[Guest 2]: Indian establishment that public money is free. I'll spend it on whim. And oftentimes,
[Guest 2]: the adults in the room are saying, no, it is one rupee. In this book, we are saying,
[Guest 2]: no, it's not one rupee, it is three rupees. That when you spend a rupee of public money,
[Guest 2]: you're actually spending three rupees of the people of India. Now think for yourself that
[Guest 2]: are you getting bang for the buck?
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, this is an added dimension because already what I argue is that spending
[Amit Varma]: public money, spending government money carries a moral cost because that money has been taken
[Guest 1]: from coercion. You're adding to the moral cost by saying that look, one rupee is an
[Amit Varma]: economic cost. That, you know, is hopelessly and you know, we should keep this stuff in
[Amit Varma]: mind where we see the government spending on anything, you know, whether it is a space
[Amit Varma]: program or a statue or advertising for different government departments, or whatever the case
[Amit Varma]: might be, we might all differ in terms of the ideology we have as to government spending
[Amit Varma]: that government should do this or not do this. But as long as we can justify the coercion
[Amit Varma]: and this marginal cost of public funds, you know, that is how we should frame our arguments.
[Guest 2]: So a healthy debate would be that you may think that X is an important expenditure program.
[Guest 2]: I may think Y is an important expenditure program. He is the finance secretary who's
[Guest 2]: resolving all these rival claims upon a scarce pot of money. And we should all be conducting
[Guest 2]: our argument around this kind of framework, where you would argue that my bang for the
[Guest 2]: buck is seven. And I would argue that my bang for the buck is five. And there would be a
[Guest 2]: debate around that or what is the best use of money, but that would be a nice rational
[Guest 2]: discourse. And that's not what we have in India today.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm thinking the effects of this coercion are, you know, to go with the title of my
[Amit Varma]: show, they're an unseen effect, that if they were somehow to be made tangible in some form,
[Amit Varma]: then many people would just feel embarrassed asking for government spending, because the
[Amit Varma]: cost would be visible. And now the cost is invisible. And we sort of...
[Guest 1]: But this example reminded me of a true story about how decisions are being made. There's
[Guest 1]: a debate between Minister of Highway and Planning Commission. The number of lanes a particular
[Guest 1]: highway should have, whether four lanes or two lanes. As a finance secretary, I was asked
[Guest 1]: to sort of decide. Now, I had no information to work out the marginal benefit. And so when
[Guest 1]: a gentleman made a presentation, I mean, he argues, I asked him one question. I said,
[Guest 1]: if Shershah was alive, what he would have done? The general concept was four lanes.
[Guest 1]: I said, let's go with four lanes. Because the long term benefits obviously are much
[Guest 1]: greater if Shershah could foresee what he has done in the entire system. So, but I mean,
[Guest 1]: that was the most rational way of doing it. But in the absence of any information, I thought
[Guest 1]: that's the only way to decide. Go by the precedent.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes you just have to have creative heuristics. We'll take a quick commercial break and we'll
[Amit Varma]: continue talking about this amazing book on the other side of the break.
[Amit Varma]: One of the great joys of doing the seen and the unseen is that it forces me to read a
[Amit Varma]: lot more than I used to. I was a voracious reader as a kid. But once I entered adulthood,
[Amit Varma]: I lost that habit. And it's an incredibly important habit. The more we read, the better
[Amit Varma]: we understand the world and the people around us. We make sense of the world through stories
[Amit Varma]: by connecting dots. And the more dots we have, the clearer our vision. Reading gives us those
[Amit Varma]: dots. I've been working hard on my reading habit. And now I invite you to join me. My
[Amit Varma]: new podcast, The Book Club by Amit Verma begins in early January exclusively on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: This is a weekly show that I run for a year. Every week on The Book Club, I will recommend
[Amit Varma]: one book that I enjoy reading. And I will speak about what it brought to me and why
[Amit Varma]: you should read it. You can use my show to take random recommendations yourself. Or you
[Amit Varma]: can start a reading club of your own using my show as a starting point. I'll discuss
[Amit Varma]: all genres of fiction and nonfiction. And hopefully together we can understand the world
[Amit Varma]: a little bit better. Coming soon, The Book Club by Amit Verma, only on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Vijay Kelkar and Ajay Shah
[Amit Varma]: about the excellent book in service of the Republic, the art and science of economic
[Amit Varma]: policy. And before the break, we were talking about constraints that the state sometimes
[Amit Varma]: faces in the government sometimes faces in terms of public policy. Well, the three of
[Amit Varma]: us have a slight constraint of our own in the sense that in another 40 minutes, Vijay
[Amit Varma]: has another appointment which he has to rush for. But Ajay and I will continue talking
[Amit Varma]: or diminishing in podcast capacity. But I promise you we'll do our best. What I also
[Amit Varma]: sort of wanted to talk about and what is sort of a strand running through your entire book
[Amit Varma]: and a strand that as you know, interests me greatly is public choice theory. You know
[Amit Varma]: where especially in India, we often assume that market failure to have the state must
[Amit Varma]: step in, but government failure, if anything, is even more ubiquitous. In fact, government
[Amit Varma]: failure is ubiquitous market failure is rare, is how I would see it. Vijay, especially in
[Amit Varma]: all your long decades in government, I'm assuming that most of the insights of public choice
[Amit Varma]: theory would have come to you by lived experience rather than actually reading the theory of
[Amit Varma]: it. Can you tell me a little bit before you begin apologies to the listener for not clarifying
[Amit Varma]: public choice theory basically uses the tools of economics to look at how the state functions.
[Amit Varma]: And the key insight is that people within a state respond to incentives, just as individuals
[Amit Varma]: outside do. Sorry, Vijay.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, the one example was about policy problem was that how to increase energy independence,
[Guest 1]: because India's imports of oil was going up and it is a reasonable policy objective that
[Guest 1]: you don't want to be dependent on entirely rest of the world because this is such a crucial
[Guest 1]: commodity and you can't. So, what are the ways of doing this? So, one of those instrument
[Guest 1]: was stocking it, but second was giving domestic exploration and production. Now, we designed
[Guest 1]: policy we call new exploration licensing policy. What happened? It required the regulatory
[Guest 1]: function both in terms of what they call to ensure that the private sector does not deplete
[Guest 1]: the resource by inefficient production system, because there's a finite resource and non-renewable.
[Guest 1]: You don't want to ensure the society, you want to use it as efficient as possible. This
[Guest 1]: second problem is that two contiguous blocks, very possible to take away oil from the neighboring
[Guest 1]: block without the neighbor knowing it. So, that's also has to be regulated because their
[Guest 1]: property rights can be. So, one is this issue. Now, here the incentives for the people who
[Guest 1]: man this regulatory authorities, we thought were sort of same as what the society has,
[Guest 1]: but soon you realize that there is a systematic difference. One major and I'm not talking
[Guest 1]: about malfeasance, but that's one of the objectives of the civil servants of public authorities
[Guest 1]: is easy life. Because he's not trying to, he's not going to follow completely all the
[Guest 1]: system and procedures which are required to ensure what the obligations are. So, you have
[Guest 1]: to be mindful of that there is the objectives of the people who do it are very different
[Guest 1]: than what the state has. And because of this simple reason, they completely change, want
[Guest 1]: to change the policies at the expense of internal society. You know, to ease the problems of
[Guest 1]: the civil servants or the regulatory authorities, they've changed the nature of contract, which
[Guest 1]: was rational and optimal use all over the world. And if I don't know, I remember debate
[Guest 1]: but debate took place to move towards what they call revolutionary contract. Now, Econ
[Guest 1]: 101 will tell you that it's like putting excise tax, under those conditions production will
[Guest 1]: go down. If you have excise, if you're going to shift the tax to consumer, the only implication
[Guest 1]: of excise tax is that production will go down. But the civil servants are not concerned because
[Guest 1]: that's the give them easy life. And I was quite disappointed that I could not persuade
[Guest 1]: the government, because again, government, they are not willing to accept the what's
[Guest 1]: the correct thing to do for country as a whole to optimise country's scarce resources, and
[Guest 1]: they opted for a contract. And I mean, the number, the cost to the society, the number
[Guest 1]: of which we are given and I was surprised by look at number of people were challenging
[Guest 1]: us about the number, we did very careful analysis, would not be less than $500 billion. It's
[Guest 1]: the cost of resource foregone to be exploited.
[Guest 1]: 500 billion.
[Guest 1]: $500 billion. Now, we could be wrong, because this is a waste of future. But nobody has
[Guest 1]: a single question, or nobody start up in the civil services. Oh, my God, is that the cost?
[Guest 1]: Maybe that report is wrong, they double check it. Because even if you're wrong, 500% even
[Guest 1]: $100 billion is not a small number. So that is the most vivid example, in which the functionaries
[Guest 1]: objectives are very different than the society's objectives. And society pay very, very heavy
[Guest 1]: price potentially.
[Amit Varma]: No, and is it then fair to say that the principle of public choice theory, which this illustrates,
[Amit Varma]: is that if you look at the incentives of a bureaucrat, his incentives are to reduce the
[Amit Varma]: friction in his own life. And he is naturally risk averse, because there's not much of a
[Amit Varma]: reward for doing something right, because the payoffs are so much down the road, and
[Amit Varma]: they're hard to ascribe. But the cost of doing something wrong could be great. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: he will tend to be risk averse, sticking to the status quo and basically playing it safe.
[Guest 2]: But I just want to say, I agree with the sentences you just said as a description and a characterization
[Guest 2]: of the Indian state today. But as we say in the book, public choice theory is also an
[Guest 2]: extremely optimistic message. In that it tells us that the behavior of the bureaucrat and
[Guest 2]: the politician is not immutable. These are not wood, these are not stones, but men and
[Guest 2]: being men, they will optimize, which means that when we change the rules of the game,
[Guest 2]: this behavior can change. So this behavior is actually the product of rules of the game.
[Guest 2]: And then it is our puzzle to find the rules of the game that address all this. So if we
[Guest 2]: will create an incentive structure that good work by an official is not valued and bad
[Guest 2]: work destroys the entire career of the official or one investigation will mess with the life
[Guest 2]: of an official, then yeah, you will get certain kinds of behavior. But that means we've got
[Guest 2]: to go to those foundations. We've got to understand how we hire people, how we incentivize people,
[Guest 2]: how we do promotions, how we respect people, how we investigate people. Each of these things
[Guest 2]: shapes the behavior. And behavior is actually endogenous. So our good friend, Percy Mistry
[Guest 2]: taught me a great thing. I used to always whine about the mindset problem in Indian
[Guest 2]: financial regulators. I used to say, the mindset is wrong. They don't understand financial
[Guest 2]: markets and the financial system. And we have to change the mindset. And Percy would say
[Guest 2]: to me, you can't complain about mindset. What you can complain is about rules of the game.
[Guest 2]: So whatever you want to do in policy reforms is in some document. It's a law. It's a rule.
[Guest 2]: It's a manual. That's what you change. You can't change anything else. And the nice thing
[Guest 2]: is when you change the law, when you change the rules, when you change the manuals, the
[Guest 2]: behavior will change. And in 20 years, the new behavior will get ossified into culture
[Guest 2]: to a point where your grandchildren will hate you and complain about your mindset. So mindset
[Guest 2]: is just a response to rules. And that way, it's a very optimistic message that let's
[Guest 2]: change the rules of behavior will change. There's nothing innate about that behavior.
[Guest 2]: So people say the Indian bureaucracy is bad. Well, there's nothing Indian about it. It
[Guest 2]: is about our rules of the game. And we change the rules of the game, the behavior will change.
[Amit Varma]: I think you're trolling my emotional state of mind earlier, I was a pessimistic, you
[Amit Varma]: made me optimistic. And now, you know, and the other way around, because I you know,
[Amit Varma]: what we've really done so far in this episode, we've spoken for more than an hour and a half,
[Amit Varma]: is we've sort of spent a lot of time on the early part of the book. But the really sort
[Amit Varma]: of the radical and revelatory part of your book for me is really the second half, which
[Amit Varma]: is original and where you're laying out your insights and your framework about thinking
[Amit Varma]: about public policy. So I'll skim over the rest of the first half, where you have a section
[Amit Varma]: called the science, the science of public policy, which is basically looking at what
[Amit Varma]: I would say are traditional insights of economics, even econ 101, like how the price system works
[Amit Varma]: and competition is good, and you have to look at general equilibrium effects. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: why redistribution is fraught with trouble, as you put it, and so on and so forth. Let's
[Amit Varma]: not dwell on that all of this is sort of understood. And I recommend people read the book if they
[Amit Varma]: want to get a sense of your arguments in really simple language. Let's go to part four of
[Amit Varma]: your book, which is called the art. In other words, the art of public policy, where a lot
[Amit Varma]: of what I read is stuff that some of it conformed with my intuitions, and some of which I hadn't
[Amit Varma]: really read before in this form. And what I'm going to do is I'm going to you have 11
[Amit Varma]: chapters in this section. So I'm basically just going to read out chapter headings because
[Amit Varma]: they were illustrative, and ask you to elaborate on them. And the chapter heading of the first
[Amit Varma]: chapter in this is evolutionary change for society, revolutionary change for government,
[Amit Varma]: as in one of the if I may quote from your book, where you talk about how social engineering
[Amit Varma]: is inappropriate, and you of course, give mouse a sparrow fallacy, where basically,
[Amit Varma]: Mao spoke about how he wanted all the sparrows of China to be killed and what big so the
[Amit Varma]: crops, the sparrows won't eat the crops, but because the sparrows were killed, locust proliferated
[Amit Varma]: and they ate the crops. And I gave this as an example, I cited Mao's sparrow campaign
[Guest 1]: as an example for demonetization.
[Guest 1]: Exactly, I was going to say that. Demonetization is a classic example of this, where you wanted
[Guest 1]: to suppose I'm willing to accept the government objective, that you want to abolish black
[Guest 1]: money. Now, first of all, the specification was wrong. Black money is not a stock problem,
[Guest 1]: it's a flow problem. So, so that was one major concept. But even in terms of, you accept
[Guest 1]: the stock, if you remember, the difficulties of doing it, given the size of India, more
[Guest 1]: than 100 people died. That was the cost of organizing the so called large change in the
[Guest 1]: behavior of not using cash, using plastic money, whatever you want to call it, suppose
[Guest 1]: it was large behavioral change. It was done in extremely, extremely irresponsible manner
[Guest 1]: in my view, in terms of but cost is imposed. And many ways, many of the aggravation of
[Guest 1]: Indian economy's problems, growth problems, are probably linked to that episode. So costs
[Guest 1]: are very high of social engineering. But government can be, you can make radical changes in the
[Amit Varma]: government. Evolutionary for government, revolutionary for government. I mean, I've done a few episodes
[Amit Varma]: on demonetization, in fact, around three of them. And I, you know, pointed out it was
[Amit Varma]: in a column I wrote in the Times of India at the time, which I link from the show notes
[Amit Varma]: where I compared that to Mao. And that sort of also illustrates the one central problem
[Amit Varma]: with social engineering, which is Hayek's knowledge problem. Like one of the reasons
[Amit Varma]: I think that Prime Minister Modi thought it was a good idea is because he had never bought
[Amit Varma]: anything from a store in the last 15 or 20 years. And therefore, he did not realize that
[Amit Varma]: a 1000 rupee note is no longer something used for storing black money, but everybody uses
[Guest 2]: 1000 rupee notes.
[Guest 2]: So I want to say two things. One is just continuing on these themes that large actions by governments
[Guest 2]: tend to go wrong, because we just don't know enough about society. And we have some notions
[Guest 2]: in our head. And these grand schemes generally go wrong. And particularly with the kind of
[Guest 2]: capabilities of the Indian state, these kinds of things will not work very well. That's
[Guest 2]: one practical idea that you just don't know enough, so don't mess with it. Okay, so that's
[Guest 2]: one way to think about it. It's also good to bring political values into this to bring
[Guest 2]: enlightenment values into this, that is there a relationship between us and the state as
[Guest 2]: that of a subject to a ruler, or are we citizens in a republic. And there is something very
[Guest 2]: awkward about a ruler telling you that I shall decree that you will do this. And I think
[Guest 2]: that fundamentally gets you into the wrong place in the nature of the relationship between
[Guest 2]: citizen and state. The nature of the relationship between the citizen and the republic has to
[Guest 2]: be one where the citizenry thinks and dreams and devises its own life on its own terms,
[Guest 2]: rather than being ordered by the state. And I want to tell you a funny story of this nature.
[Guest 2]: I was at the U2 concert two nights ago, and some central planner thought that it would
[Guest 2]: be a very cool thing to do to have some newfangled payment system, which where there would be
[Guest 2]: electronic payments. And what was wrong was that they created a forcible monopoly, that
[Guest 2]: you would only be able to do payments inside the stadium using that electronic money system.
[Guest 2]: So there were many establishments selling food, and you were supposed to pay for them
[Guest 2]: only using that electronic system. So cash was not allowed or not permitted. Cards were
[Guest 2]: not allowed or not permitted. Some central planner had decided that we're only going
[Guest 2]: to do it one way and it all sounds nice. I can bet that there had been some slideshow
[Guest 2]: in some room where it all sounded clean and tidy. But reality is not clean. Reality is
[Guest 2]: not tidy. What actually happened at the venue was that there was a comprehensive technology
[Guest 2]: failure and nothing worked. And 50,000 people went hungry. And I bet hundreds of kilos of
[Guest 2]: food had to be thrown away because there was nobody who was able to buy them. Okay. So
[Guest 2]: there was some engineering failure and the thing broke down. And I would just, you know,
[Guest 2]: beseech everybody concerned that don't be so cocky in your knowledge to think that you
[Guest 2]: will engineer this whole thing and it's going to work. Let there be diversity. It's good
[Guest 2]: that there's cash. You know, so I think people have become religious about cashless. I think
[Guest 2]: cash is great. Cash has a lot of good property. Cash is freedom. Yeah. Cash is freedom. Cash
[Guest 2]: is anonymity. Cash is safety from the state. There are many good things about cash. And
[Guest 2]: then there are credit cards. And then there are many rival alternative credit card platforms
[Guest 2]: and systems. And that is good. Okay. And then there can be more modern conceptions of electronic
[Guest 2]: money. There should be opening up of the RBI, RTGS system for technology players. So the
[Guest 2]: central planning instinct that some engineers will use the coercive power of the state to
[Guest 2]: build one single national system and we'll roll it out everywhere. This is really something
[Guest 2]: we should be nervous about. You know, in Nehru's time, there were people who tried that. Okay.
[Guest 2]: And arguably Nehru and Mahalanobis and others were decent people and brilliant people. And
[Guest 2]: you can never get better people like that. And we know how badly it worked out. Do we
[Guest 2]: really want to do that all over again? So I think learning history is humbling because
[Guest 2]: you see amazing people having tried to do central planning and having failed. It's not
[Guest 2]: for want of trying. We admire those people. Okay. You can't get a person better than Jawaharlal
[Guest 2]: Nehru. You can't get a thinker better than P.C. Mahalanobis and their entire generation.
[Guest 2]: They were great people. They came out of the freedom movement. They tried to choose there
[Guest 2]: shall be this technology for this factory. There will be this use for aluminum. They
[Guest 2]: tried to centrally plan. It was all very tidy. It was all very nice. It did not work. It
[Guest 2]: just went wrong over and over.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, in one of the core principles of this chapter, which is that whenever you
[Amit Varma]: have to choose between interventions, take one which has the smallest impact. Has this
[Amit Varma]: roots I think both in deontology and consequentialism. Deontology because you're going back to the
[Amit Varma]: core value that coercion is bad. So coerce as little as possible, choose the least coercive
[Amit Varma]: intervention. And to consequentialism because you're saying that we don't know what the
[Amit Varma]: consequences will be because we don't have enough knowledge. You know, harking back to
[Amit Varma]: the point about humility that, you know, I'd made right at the start of the program and
[Amit Varma]: you know, and therefore, limit your actions to as small as possible so that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the unintended consequences will obviously fall less. And another theme through your
[Amit Varma]: entire book, in fact, is that public policymakers have to communicate, communicate, communicate.
[Amit Varma]: So whatever you're planning, you have to sort of and that again, harks back to what you
[Amit Varma]: just said about the subject versus citizen, that we are not subjects that the government
[Amit Varma]: tells us that, okay, this is our decree, but the government consults us and through that
[Guest 1]: consultative process, something emerges.
[Guest 1]: You see, the subtitle is communicate, communicate, we didn't give, what I call Lata-Kerriker
[Guest 1]: theorem. Lata is my wife and when I was Petroleum Secretary, the issue came up about increasing
[Guest 1]: the prices of petroleum barrels. Her point was, in public policy, surprise should be
[Guest 1]: never unpleasant. You can give pleasant surprise, but unpleasant surprise gives a revolt. And
[Guest 1]: this is, you see repeatedly, when your price is very high, there is resistance. First,
[Guest 1]: you're not going to communicate the need for it, you know, told them in advance the implications
[Guest 1]: of this. So communicate, communicate, communicate, because you have to make people understand.
[Guest 1]: If you, especially if the change is very large, so introduce changes in small, give surprise
[Guest 1]: which will be pleasant. If it's an unpleasant surprise, communicate, communicate, communicate.
[Guest 1]: So it's very important in public policy, is communication.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you gave a great example of this in your book where you talk about Yashwant
[Guest 1]: Sinha decision to reduce customs duties by 5% a year. Can you elaborate on that a little
[Guest 1]: bit?
[Guest 1]: No, because it was, in fact, unnoticed at that time. But look at, we have brought down
[Guest 1]: our import duty levels to that time, almost ASEAN levels. Had it done in one go, first
[Amit Varma]: there would have been resistance.
[Guest 1]: So if you just say it's 25%, they're obviously going to resist.
[Guest 1]: Tomorrow, the next day, they would have reversed it. So the credibility of the government would
[Guest 1]: have gone. But this is a way, because it's also a lot of privacy to plan in advance.
[Guest 1]: They could do the planning, they've taken long-term investment decisions. They know
[Guest 1]: what's going to come. And it was predictable, change was anticipated, no sudden shock, no
[Guest 1]: sudden shower, because people don't like unpleasant surprises.
[Guest 1]: So 5% is not a big deal, but they think that in five years, it'll be 25%, we have to work
[Guest 1]: for it.
[Guest 1]: And similarly, if you remember, his objective was one single excise duty, which he called
[Guest 1]: same number as given by Chanakya in his book. What is the optimal rate of taxation? He said
[Guest 1]: Shadbhag, one-sixth. If you remember, his sovereignty should not take more than Shadbhag.
[Guest 1]: So I wanted to have 16% as a single rate of taxation. Had it done in one go, there were
[Guest 1]: a lot of problems when the pricing went down. So it was done, if you remember, a myriad
[Guest 1]: of numbers were brought to three bands. I think if I remember correctly, 6, 16, and
[Guest 1]: 28 or something like that. So again, it was done slowly. Change, but people knew the direction
[Guest 1]: that we were going to reduce rates. People knew there was going to be no arbitrary changes.
[Guest 1]: And second, no, what was happening there and there, tremendous of lobbying and rent-seeking
[Guest 1]: in changing the rates. So that also reduced. So giving enough time, you gave the direction
[Guest 1]: we were going, people could adjust slowly, and it didn't give a sudden shock. Because
[Guest 1]: it always happened, you know, I studied the episodes of price increases in petroleum products,
[Guest 1]: over 12 episodes I remember, because every time it was reversed, when it was very large.
[Guest 1]: So people don't like surprises. And very simple reason, because petroleum products
[Guest 1]: demand elasticity, price rises very low. There are no substitutes available. So price rise
[Guest 1]: has immediate implications in the consumer basket. But other, there's one kind of substitute,
[Guest 1]: if a certain price goes up for my shoes, I can use chappals. But there's no choice for
[Guest 1]: especially for transportation fuels. So the lesson is, don't give large changes. It takes
[Guest 1]: time for people to adjust. People don't like shocks.
[Amit Varma]: So this Lata Kelkar rule, of course, as you said, applies to, you know, how the state
[Amit Varma]: acts with regard to society, evolutionary change. But for government, you don't favour
[Amit Varma]: this, you said evolutionary change for government. Can you elaborate on that?
[Guest 1]: For example, when we became independent, the kind of introduction were policy changes were
[Guest 1]: made by that generation, were revolution changes for the government. Whole colonial government
[Guest 1]: was replaced by the independent. So the bureaucracy had to change, bureaucracy had to be sort
[Guest 1]: of given culture, the whole culture change, how you treat the citizens. So there's revolution
[Guest 1]: change for the government. One example I can think of.
[Amit Varma]: But in a prescriptive way, would you say that even today, the revolutionary changes for
[Guest 1]: the...
[Guest 1]: I would be a little wary because the quality of leadership is not same as what we had at
[Guest 1]: the time of independent movement.
[Amit Varma]: That's very true. And that's also possibly a response to incentives, as I keep saying
[Amit Varma]: that back then the leaders had a sort of, they weren't animated by the lust for power,
[Amit Varma]: because power was, you know, not within their reach. So they were animated by higher ideals,
[Amit Varma]: and they were incentivised by that. And that's obviously not the case today. So as an incentive
[Guest 1]: changed, our leaders changed.
[Guest 1]: You know, I mean, extraordinary. Freedom Party, like his father, when they were sacrificing,
[Guest 1]: they didn't even know whether they'll get independent lifetime or not. So it was amazing
[Guest 1]: generation, which really animated by higher public good. There's no private gains were,
[Guest 1]: they didn't, I don't even thought about it. That anything private gains are involved.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I'm recording this on December 17. And it strikes me that those leaders are more
[Amit Varma]: in common with the students who have been protesting all across the country today than
[Amit Varma]: with the actual political leaders.
[Guest 1]: You're right. In fact, it's the wrong thing was what happened, which provoked this, but
[Guest 1]: as it is, the response has been heartwarming. And it has happened all across India. It's
[Guest 1]: happened Ajmer, Pune, Coimbatore, Bihar. So that's heartwarming, in that sense.
[Guest 1]: That we can still be animated by larger public good.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps a realisation that that freedom struggle never quite got over, there was enclosure
[Amit Varma]: for that. Let's sort of move on to the next chapter title, which is cross the river by
[Amit Varma]: feeling the stones.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, this is my favourite learning from China. You know, China's revolutionary change came,
[Guest 1]: they say, by Deng Xiaoping. And he's a famous leader from the south, he toured south southern
[Guest 1]: China. And you know, first changes were made in agriculture sector by the agriculture minister.
[Guest 1]: And reforms that people respond to prices, incentives, was first experimented when they
[Guest 1]: want to change in a small, large, if it's absolutely small in some Chinese size of economy,
[Guest 1]: in small province of China, that later on became a famous minister in his government.
[Guest 1]: So learning from this experiment, and he started expanding. Then again, he created this SSS.
[Guest 1]: SSS against coastal region, started small, and then enlarge learning from them. So everywhere
[Guest 1]: he started with this feeling they want to call the stones because we don't know so little,
[Guest 1]: frankly, when we embark on policies, it's always better to start with what you call
[Guest 1]: sharding, sharding is a Chinese word which is used in policy experiments.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the example you gave was of the recent plastics ban in Mumbai last year, where you
[Amit Varma]: said that instead of doing it in a large city like Mumbai with such effects, they should
[Amit Varma]: have tried it in a small town somewhere, gathered the data, seen the effects, seen the consequences
[Guest 1]: and then decided to do it in a new terrain of knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: I'll sort of, you know, quickly go through the different elements of this chapter, which
[Amit Varma]: you point out element one, you point out that there are no silver bullets in public policy,
[Amit Varma]: don't look for a magic pill that will solve everything. Element two, it should be a participatory
[Amit Varma]: and therefore slow process. Element three, small moves coupled with feedback loops, do
[Amit Varma]: something small, see what happens, see the effects, the plastics, of course, being an
[Amit Varma]: example of that. And in that participatory process, you talk about you give nine stages
[Amit Varma]: of drafting a legal document, which I'll quickly rush through for our listeners, because I
[Amit Varma]: think it's valuable as a structure of thinking about the problem, which is number one, clearly
[Amit Varma]: identifying a problem that needs to be solved. Number two, demonstrating that there is a
[Amit Varma]: market failure. Number three, using a systemic process that is cost benefit analysis to identify
[Amit Varma]: the lowest cost intervention that would address the problem. Number four, drafting a legal
[Amit Varma]: instrument that expresses the chosen best intervention. Number five, releasing those
[Amit Varma]: draft documents for public discussion. Number six, responding to all substantive points
[Amit Varma]: that are made through public comment, including modifying the legal instrument in response
[Amit Varma]: to some comments which prove to be correct. Number seven, a senior level discussion about
[Amit Varma]: the entire documentation packet and the consequential modifications. Number eight, releasing the
[Amit Varma]: final legal instrument with a future date to which it becomes effective. Number nine,
[Amit Varma]: conducting an ex post review, three years later, nine clear stages. Has this sort of
[Amit Varma]: thinking been implemented anywhere? Like, is this how it actually works today in parts
[Amit Varma]: of the government?
[Guest 2]: Not in the Indian state, but yeah, it's very much used all over the world. We have we're
[Guest 2]: just importing ideas. This is part of the world of new public management, which came
[Guest 2]: up in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, etc, in the early 80s, that there is this
[Guest 2]: kind of stylized process through which a legal instrument is done. And I think it's a great
[Guest 2]: discipline. It's a formal procedure for each of the stages, manuals are written, staff
[Guest 2]: are trained. And you see how well it works in terms of bringing the society on the table
[Guest 2]: when the legal instrument is drafted. Once again, you're citizen and state, not a subject.
[Guest 2]: And the whole thing evolves through a long time period, which gives the private sector
[Guest 2]: ample time, both to influence the process saying, you know, you really should not be
[Guest 2]: doing this, this is wrong, and to change the business plans. Otherwise, needlessly, you
[Guest 2]: impose disruptive costs on society when something changes. So as an example, think of the last
[Guest 2]: and the second last points. At point eight, whenever the legal instrument is issued, it
[Guest 2]: should always be effective at some point in the future, not tomorrow. It is so harmful
[Guest 2]: that in India, things are being announced, it's effective from tomorrow. And really people
[Guest 2]: have not been given time to even wake up understand this, and they have to comply with a brand
[Guest 2]: new law by tomorrow. This is not right. This is not fair to the citizenry. And we should
[Guest 2]: really stop doing these things. And the last point, three years later, look back, did you
[Guest 2]: get the job done that you wrote that regulation because you believed that there was a problem
[Guest 2]: in society that you sought to solve? Okay, did it happen? If it didn't happen, please
[Guest 2]: reverse your regulation. Otherwise, in India, we're just accumulating a detritus of more
[Guest 2]: and more interference with human freedom. And we've never ever gone back and checked
[Guest 2]: whether any of this actually helped. So how do you undo laws because you find that they
[Guest 1]: did not work? And there's also the
[Guest 1]: United States, there's almost I think, sort of standard operating procedure to have sunset
[Guest 1]: clause in many of the major proposals, because it forces you to do the review all over again,
[Guest 1]: all over again. And this litany of in India, we will take the Bombay Raid Control Act,
[Guest 1]: a simple example. It has done exactly opposite everything what you wanted. Maharashtra Revolutionary
[Guest 1]: Land Stealing Act. It was revolutionary in 1940s, 50s it was done, but today it has become
[Guest 1]: major concern in Maharashtra culture. So one can keep on, but if we had a sort of mandatory
[Guest 1]: sunset clause, then this would have been compulsorily reviewed.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm guessing that there's an inertia in the system, which is inbuilt and natural given
[Amit Varma]: the incentives of bureaucrats to favour the status quo. Is this something that you had
[Amit Varma]: to fight? Is it possible to fight this kind of large inertia in the system?
[Guest 1]: Yes, by having this kind of standard operating rules, rules of behaviour, that once you make
[Guest 1]: laws, even political system is told that it will be reviewed as a by sunset clause. Then
[Guest 1]: that means you have to continue to defend and you can get rid of the laws which have
[Guest 1]: become counterproductive or which you would have anticipated how they will function. And
[Guest 1]: this is really, I see the Maharashtrian culture, the basic constraint is our laws, which are
[Guest 1]: outdated. They were revolutionary, I have no problem when they came about, they played
[Guest 1]: a very important role. But now they've become a constraint.
[Amit Varma]: Now I've had episodes on agriculture, which deal with the subject and on rent control
[Amit Varma]: also with the damage that is still causing the common people of Mumbai, but all sort
[Amit Varma]: of unseen effects. And I just like to stress that the value of the participative process
[Amit Varma]: is not just at a moral level that citizens should be consulted, they're not subjects,
[Amit Varma]: but also at an efficiency level, because you're getting diverse inputs and far more knowledge
[Amit Varma]: into the system. And you have in fact spoken
[Guest 2]: Very, very low cost.
[Guest 2]: Very low cost.
[Guest 2]: And third, that the private sector gets time to change business strategies, because it
[Guest 2]: is a cost that private people have building firms, they're investing in technology and
[Guest 2]: processes and training, along a certain understanding of the policy environment. And then suddenly
[Guest 2]: the policy environment changes. And you do this too often to people, then the response
[Guest 2]: will be, I'm not going to invest.
[Guest 2]: It's a chilling effect on business and investment.
[Guest 2]: It's a chilling effect on investment, because when you will disruptively destroy the organizational
[Guest 2]: capital that firms have built, firms become very bitter. Nobody likes to have their hard
[Guest 2]: work being destroyed because of a change in rules. So, changing rules in a participatory
[Guest 2]: way with ample discussion, elapsed time, forward starting date, then becomes a part of normal
[Guest 2]: business planning that I get time, I know this is coming, I will evolve my processes
[Guest 2]: gradually to be ready for that when it comes.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost time for Vijay to go. So, before Ajay and I continue our discussion,
[Amit Varma]: Vijay, thanks so much for coming on the show. It's a great honor to meet you.
[Guest 1]: No, I would just request your listeners do look at the book. It is much richer than even
[Guest 1]: today's discussion in terms of content. And we propose to bring out next edition. So,
[Guest 1]: if you have any suggestions, please let us know because then we'll, in which areas you
[Guest 1]: find it more should be done or something can be sort of deleted. But that'd be helpful.
[Guest 1]: And thank you for having me. It was a great learning experience. Every time I interact
[Guest 1]: with Ajay, I learn.
[Guest 1]: You do.
[Guest 1]: I do. And now I find every time I interact with you, I'm going to learn also.
[Amit Varma]: That's very kind of you. Thank you so much.
[Guest 1]: Thank you very much. So, if I permit, I'll take your leave.
[Amit Varma]: Yep. Right. And Ajay, you and I will now have to deal with this reduced podcast capacity,
[Amit Varma]: as it were. And it's very interesting. You were telling me about how this nine stage
[Amit Varma]: process of drafting a legal document is international best practice in some places.
[Amit Varma]: And your very next chapter is titled adapting from the international experience question mark,
[Amit Varma]: where you actually give cautionary advice against necessarily just blindly picking up
[Guest 2]: things from international policy.
[Guest 2]: This is a response to what I call the curse of Google. I find too many people will look
[Guest 2]: at a problem that is presented in the world of public policy. We'll do a little Googling,
[Guest 2]: which will generally take you to some German and UK and Singapore websites. And you'll
[Guest 2]: do some cut and paste and you'll say, this is what we should do in policy. Or more generally,
[Guest 2]: the discussion and the debate in India tends to be disproportionately influenced by the blogs
[Guest 2]: and the policy journals that are present in the world, who are discussing problems present
[Guest 2]: elsewhere. And that kind of transplantation really doesn't work. Each place is different.
[Guest 2]: You have to look at the place, you have to figure out from first principles. So, for example,
[Guest 2]: I would ask you that that nine part procedure, does it make sense to you? You live in India,
[Guest 2]: you're deeply rooted here. Can you visualize how that would operate here? And would it add value?
[Guest 2]: And, you know, we get excited that, wow, this is really good. It would help us,
[Guest 2]: we would do better if we use that kind of thing. But primarily, we've got to be grounded here
[Guest 2]: in the Indian landscape. We've got to have deep experiential local knowledge,
[Guest 2]: and we've got to solve problems here. So, we should be careful about copying.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I'll quote from your book again. At one point, you say, quote,
[Amit Varma]: as Lan Pichet says, a first world policy practitioner is a bit like a New York taxi
[Amit Varma]: driver. The taxi driver knows how to perform rides and get paid, but has no conception of
[Amit Varma]: why the taxi system of New York works. Policy institutions and advanced economies have been
[Amit Varma]: refined for hundreds of years. And most people in close proximity to those institutions lack
[Amit Varma]: an awareness of why things work. Stop quote. In other words, and this again goes back to the
[Amit Varma]: seen and the unseen theme, you talk about the invisible infrastructure behind societies and
[Amit Varma]: behind how states work. And that is very local, like the term you use for it, which you got from
[Amit Varma]: James Scott from the book, Seeing Like a State is metis, which is that local understanding of
[Amit Varma]: the system and the culture, and then you have to design solutions based on that.
[Guest 2]: So, invisible infrastructure. My favorite example is from the field of health.
[Guest 2]: If you go to the UK, you go to France, you see a very nice health system. When you walk around
[Guest 2]: France, you really admire those people and how well a reasonably socialistic health system works.
[Guest 2]: But if you try to transplant that in India, it will absolutely not work. Why? Because there are
[Guest 2]: a thousand subtle aspects. Why does that nurse show up to work in the morning? Why does that
[Guest 2]: nurse work? What happens when a doctor engages in malpractice? What is the legal system that
[Guest 2]: deals with malpractice? There are so many other elements that are reshaping the incentives of the
[Guest 2]: individuals. So, when a visitor goes in and sees a little dance between a doctor and a nurse and a
[Guest 2]: hospital and a patient, it all looks so nice and tidy. And unfortunately, many times a visitor
[Guest 2]: is also a doctor and doctors know how to think about my liver malfunctioning, not how human
[Guest 2]: societies work through incentives. It gives you the worst possible transplantation. So, we should
[Guest 2]: be very conscious that in a short visit or in any one vertical domain expertise, you will really
[Guest 2]: not understand why a first world institution works well. So, we admire first world countries
[Guest 2]: and there is a lot to learn about how things have been done well in the first world. But at the same
[Guest 2]: time, we've got to think deeply about the incentives that hold it together.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, and the term Pritchett used for it, of course, is isomorphic mimicry,
[Amit Varma]: which I think my friend Shruti Rajgopalan and Alex Tabarrok, who have both been on the show
[Amit Varma]: before in multiple episodes, have written a paper on and hopefully I'll chat with them
[Amit Varma]: soon about the paper. Another part of this chapter, which I was really struck by, I found
[Amit Varma]: amusing also, was when you talk about the three levels of intellectual capacity, where I will
[Amit Varma]: quote from you, quote, at level one, we come up with foolish proposals unmoored in logic or
[Amit Varma]: analysis. At level two, we use Google and unthinkingly copy what other countries are doing,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, and then you come to level three later, quote, at level three, we have acquired
[Amit Varma]: metrics, we are authentically grounded in our backyard and engage in creative problem solving
[Amit Varma]: for first principles, stop quote. But the flip side of this also is that, of course, we can't
[Amit Varma]: just transplant policies from head to there, like you point out, because invisible infrastructures
[Amit Varma]: are very different, and we have to take that into account. But what we can do sometimes is that if
[Amit Varma]: we don't have state capacity here, we can free ride on state capacity from outside.
[Guest 2]: Shruti Rajgopalan So in the rest of that chapter,
[Guest 2]: there are some tantalizing examples that in certain settings, there are things happening
[Guest 2]: outside that one can use, and you use the word free riding. And that's exactly right.
[Guest 2]: As you have seen, the defining theme of this book is that we in India have very little state
[Guest 2]: capacity. So, the best battle that you can fight is a battle that you don't have to fight. So,
[Guest 2]: are there some things that you can not do? Okay. And I think the best example of that
[Guest 2]: is the role of the United States FCC in global spectrum management. Okay, so everywhere in the
[Guest 2]: world, there would have been an externalities problem that does this device interfere with
[Guest 2]: that device? And what are our rules of the game of the use of electromagnetic spectrum?
[Guest 2]: And in theory, the Indian state would have had to develop an organization,
[Guest 2]: which would test devices, award licenses, get permissions. Okay, and that would have been quite
[Guest 2]: a job of establishing state capacity. And in fact, we've not done that. What have we done? We've just
[Guest 2]: said, we will have free import of devices. Most of the electronic devices in any case are not made
[Guest 2]: in India. India is not much of an electronics manufacturing center. And so effectively,
[Guest 2]: every device sold in India is US FCC certified, which is what ensures that they don't conflict
[Guest 2]: with each other, which is why your cordless phone does not interfere with your cell phone.
[Guest 2]: You know, somebody else is doing all that hard work. We're running on that for free.
[Guest 2]: But that same idea can be extended. We could do more things with it. For example, you mentioned
[Guest 2]: that book on the problem of drug safety in India. And many Indian factories that make drugs
[Guest 2]: are actually inspected by the United States FDA, which is a far more effective inspection
[Guest 2]: inspection organization than our Indian drugs regulations. So, could we use that creatively
[Guest 2]: here in India? For example, could I go to a shop and buy paracetamol that is branded with a logo
[Guest 2]: saying US FDA approved? Okay, maybe that'll give me more confidence that this paracetamol is made
[Guest 2]: well. You could charge a premium for it. You could charge a premium for that. You'd have to
[Guest 2]: remove the drug price control order for this purpose. Yeah. Okay. Could we go further? Could
[Guest 2]: we say that the only terms under which you're allowed to sell drugs to the Indian consumer
[Guest 2]: is if your factory is certified by a first world country? So, let it be an Australian inspector,
[Guest 2]: let it be a German inspector, let it be an American inspector. But basically,
[Guest 2]: those inspection systems have legs, have deep capacity, have deep capabilities. Let's ride on
[Guest 2]: those. You know, so now this sounds very irritating to a certain kind of person in India,
[Guest 2]: but we should be pragmatic. We're here to get things done. And we're holding a very scarce
[Guest 2]: supply of state capacity. Let's put that same attention people onto things that you can't
[Guest 2]: outsource. But what you can get rid of, should always get rid of.
[Amit Varma]: Your next chapter has an intriguing title. And I was hoping you would finally start talking about
[Amit Varma]: cricket so we could have a discussion about a subject I know something about.
[Amit Varma]: The title is Test Match, not IPL. Explain.
[Guest 2]: Well, I know almost nothing about cricket and that title is from Bhuvana Anand.
[Guest 2]: So, you'd have to ask her. The idea is that too often in India, we have this notion that
[Guest 2]: you want to start with solving a policy problem and you want to finish in a few weeks. And we
[Guest 2]: just want to say nothing gets done like that. The stuff that matters are long journeys. You have to
[Guest 2]: lay a foundation. You have to build a community. You have to very often create a statistical
[Guest 2]: infrastructure, a measurement infrastructure from scratch and cross the river by feeling the stones,
[Guest 2]: which takes time. So, in any field, we have to organize ourselves for these long marches.
[Guest 2]: It takes time. And if we are going to rage against those delays and try to get it done quickly,
[Guest 2]: we're actually going to mess it up. So, it's very important to build a community. It's very
[Guest 2]: important to build capabilities. Whatever got done in India in the last 30 years,
[Guest 2]: got done because in a certain field, a certain self-appointed community came together,
[Guest 2]: which took interest in the field, which invested in that field, which learned that field,
[Guest 2]: which stayed engaged in that field year after year after year and developed that knowledge
[Guest 2]: and capability and played a stewardship role in the evolution of those policy frameworks.
[Guest 2]: And where we've been able to nurture the continuity of these teams over long time horizons,
[Guest 2]: we got things done. Where there have been disruptive events and an entire community
[Amit Varma]: got ejected, we've got a collapse. And you say in your book, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the pain comes early and the gains come with a lag. The political puzzle of reforms lies in
[Amit Varma]: managing these two tensions, stop quote. And it seems to me that the tensions are huge because, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: politics, as you point out in the book, in this chapter, functions on an election clock,
[Amit Varma]: that the politicians incentives, going back to public choice, the politicians incentives are
[Amit Varma]: always tailored towards winning the next elections. And the next elections aren't necessarily five
[Amit Varma]: years away. They could be because there are state elections happening every year. There is always an
[Amit Varma]: election somewhere around the corner. And our parties, even when they are in power, instead of
[Amit Varma]: governing are basically always in campaign mode, the optics are very important. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: populism often wins out when it comes to agriculture, for example, they will never see the
[Amit Varma]: benefit of doing the sort of structural reforms that you and I talked about, because it could be
[Amit Varma]: 10 years down the line. But an immediate anesthetic like a farm loan waiver is obviously very popular.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't have anything against that particular anesthetic when it's accompanied with the right
[Amit Varma]: medicine to actually get to the core of the disease, which it never is. Is this an insurmountable
[Guest 2]: problem in the political economy? So this is Kelkar's big idea, which is in the chapter,
[Guest 2]: is that this is actually very surmountable. Okay, so let's talk through precisely the
[Guest 2]: phrases you used. The political party is laser like focused on winning five years from now.
[Guest 2]: And that's good. That's the consequence of the rules of the game that are encoded in the
[Guest 2]: constitution. So if you were advising that political party on what would be a management
[Guest 2]: strategy for public policy, that are going to improve my odds of winning the next election,
[Guest 2]: what would you say? And what Kelkar says is, step one, it is very important to develop
[Guest 2]: intellectual capacity and a point of view on policy when you're out of power. Because that's
[Guest 2]: the time where you lay the groundwork, you think deeply about the world when you have no
[Guest 2]: distractions of being in power. And you actually make a plan for what will I do when I win
[Guest 2]: elections one day. And that's a very important formative period. You develop your ideas,
[Guest 2]: and you also develop your communities. So you think of who are the people who are going to
[Guest 2]: participate in this. Most of the time in India at the union government, when an election is
[Guest 2]: completed, there is a coalition government and that coalition government negotiates a common
[Guest 2]: minimum program and the common minimum program flows from the manifesto. So Kelkar has always
[Guest 2]: argued that we need to do more as a community as a political system to develop high quality
[Guest 2]: manifestos and feed better material into the negotiation and into the common minimum program.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so these are all places where we need to make progress and do things better. Because
[Guest 2]: when the rubber hits the road, a new coalition takes charge and it wins the election.
[Guest 2]: Now the clock is ticking. You've got five years, you've got only five years. Now every day matters.
[Guest 2]: So in those early days, it is crucial to not waffle around. Okay, so nobody should have the
[Guest 2]: idea that winning power is something easy. Now we just hire our friends into the right positions
[Guest 2]: and we'll make it up as we go along. That's not going to get you results by 2019 or 2024,
[Guest 2]: or whatever it may be. So what is required is that after elections, there has to be a transition plan
[Guest 2]: and a new team that comes together that has a clear plan for what it wants to do. But there
[Guest 2]: has been significant development of people and ideas and documents and capabilities so that you
[Guest 2]: hit the ground running. And that's where the five years clock can be handled better. Roughly
[Guest 2]: speaking, you want to implement the difficult decisions in the first year, be unpopular
[Guest 2]: in year one and year two. Take year two and year three to build state capacity for implementation
[Guest 2]: of those results and reap fruits in year four and year five. That's roughly the way
[Guest 2]: an ambitious political party should think about the Indian five-year cycle. Hit the ground running,
[Guest 2]: do the difficult decisions in year one, build state capacity to implement them in year two
[Guest 2]: and year three, reap the fruits in terms of improved performance in year four and year five,
[Guest 2]: and then you're ready for judgment day in front of the electorate. And this is efficient for the
[Guest 2]: narrow objectives of the political party to get re-elected. And this will actually give better
[Guest 2]: performance through the entire policy process.
[Amit Varma]: Which is, you know, a couple of responses to this. One, of course, is that it sounds all hunky
[Amit Varma]: dory in the world of theory to say that this is how an opposition party should do, get an idea,
[Amit Varma]: think tank and build intellectual capacity and come up with these great plans at the ground
[Amit Varma]: running. But I am still looking at their incentives even as a political party and those
[Amit Varma]: incentives are more likely to be tailored towards populism and so on. So what is to say, number one,
[Amit Varma]: I have a couple of multi-part questions. What is to say that, number one, that those incentives
[Amit Varma]: won't be aligned with populist moves that don't actually address structural reform? Because
[Amit Varma]: they're easy, right? It's, you know, now it's almost actually become a hygiene factor for
[Amit Varma]: everyone to offer a farm loan waiver. There's no getting away from it. No one talks about the
[Amit Varma]: more risky structural stuff. The second thing is that if I just look at India, for example,
[Amit Varma]: at the moment, I look at a say the manifesto that the Congress came up with the for the last
[Amit Varma]: elections, which was much praised on Twitter, and some of it some of the points that I agree
[Amit Varma]: with entirely, and I'm sure you would as well. But the questions that come up is that number
[Amit Varma]: one, it wasn't a credible manifesto, because many of the things they spoke about, like
[Amit Varma]: empowering cities, were things that were state subjects, and they were actually in power in many
[Amit Varma]: states, and they haven't done any of those things. They're not empowering cities in Madhya
[Amit Varma]: Pradesh, they're protecting cows. And number two, a lot of what Rahul Gandhi has, for example,
[Amit Varma]: spoken about, actually repudiates the mark two policy movement and goes back to mark one, which
[Amit Varma]: is like so completely shocking for me looking back instead of looking ahead.
[Guest 2]: No, but Amit, you are debating the manifesto of the INC. I'm not. I'm on a larger idea.
[Guest 2]: That this is what we should do.
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: So the incentives.
[Guest 2]: So I'm on those incentives. So what Khelkar and I would like to say is that an integral part of our
[Guest 2]: journey in India is the maturation of political parties as institutions. At present, political
[Guest 2]: parties seem to view the world in terms of a marketing department that has to run a campaign
[Guest 2]: and get elected. And they're almost surprised when they win an election and say, oh, now what
[Guest 2]: do I do next? Okay. And we're saying that's not wise, because then you're actually not on the
[Guest 2]: pathway to winning five years from now. Okay. That winning is actually a crisis when you have not
[Guest 2]: done that developmental work. So what we would argue is that consider it possible that you may
[Guest 2]: win. And then that means laying certain infrastructure that can be built political
[Guest 2]: parties as an institution, which means you should have a shadow cabinet. You should be connected
[Guest 2]: into data and research and intellectuals and thinking capacity on policy all the time,
[Guest 2]: not just when you're in power. That you should be developing a manifesto as really the coming
[Guest 2]: together of all your thinking into a careful, well done manifesto, which is, of course,
[Guest 2]: a political product because you'd like to win elections. But it's also thought through that
[Guest 2]: what will I be able to implement? What will I execute? And then that goes typically into the
[Guest 2]: NCMP discussion, because there is a negotiation there. And I think Vajpayee taught us the
[Guest 2]: coalition dharma about how to work with partners and have an NCMP and respect the NCMP. So I think
[Guest 2]: these are important elements of the maturation of Indian democracy for how do coalition parties
[Guest 2]: learn to work together and do business with each other. You treat the CMP as a bit of a contract.
[Guest 2]: So let's take that discussion more seriously. And then all the multiple rival manifestos feed
[Guest 2]: into that negotiation. And then comes the problem of planning and execution and very simple idea,
[Guest 2]: do all the unpleasant stuff up front, because then the pain is front loaded. And by year four
[Guest 2]: and year five, you've got the benefits from the good policies, and you're ready to stand in front
[Guest 2]: of the voters and hope to win. And we would argue that this is a wise and rational approach for each
[Amit Varma]: political party. And also, I think to add to that, it's also a costless approach, because nothing is
[Amit Varma]: stopping a party from doing all the things it needs to do to win an election. But if you also
[Amit Varma]: do this, and you also have an intellectual capacity and a shadow cabinet, it doesn't hurt
[Amit Varma]: you. It's there, you know, if you want to use it, you use it. So this is our idea at saying that,
[Guest 2]: how do we plan this whole thing better? Economic policy in India has become tied around a bit of a
[Guest 2]: budget cycle that we make announcements in a budget speech. And that's really the wrong clock,
[Guest 2]: the clock to think of is five years. So when a new team wins power, you've got to play for five
[Guest 2]: years. And that's what gives you the space to do the things that are a little less populist and
[Guest 2]: will incur a short term the wrath of the electorate in year one and year two.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, the other way of looking at it is that no matter what you do to the electorate,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the wrath is a very, I mean, where's the, you know, if you just look at the last
[Amit Varma]: government, they did demonetization, and then they did, you know, their botched implementation
[Amit Varma]: of GS3, and they won by a landslide. So sometimes there seems to be no correlation with how the
[Amit Varma]: world is and how people vote. But leaving that pessimistic note aside, before you try to convert
[Amit Varma]: me into optimism, your next chapter, I found extremely insightful, it's called what is hard
[Amit Varma]: and what is easy. And over here, you lay out four dimensions of complexity, which you have to
[Amit Varma]: consider when you think about public policy. And, and I found this fantastic frame to think about
[Amit Varma]: policy. In fact, can you elaborate on these four dimensions of complexity?
[Guest 2]: So here we are building on work by Lant Pritchett and Michael Wilcock, who in 2004,
[Guest 2]: first posed this question, and all credit to them for inventing the question, and first gave a part
[Guest 2]: of the answer. And we've built further on the answer. So the question is like this, you are a
[Guest 2]: person in the world of public policy, I present you with a challenge. For example, I say, let's
[Guest 2]: roll out HPV immunization for all young kids in the country. Okay, that's a question. And it's a
[Guest 2]: very valuable thing to be able to analyze this problem and classify it into is it easy? Is it
[Guest 2]: hard? Have an intellectual framework on how to think about what is easy and what is hard. So
[Guest 2]: straight away, we should be able to talk to each other over coffee and say, that's a really hard
[Guest 2]: problem, or this is an easy problem, we'll be able to do it. Okay, so can we have an intellectual
[Guest 2]: framework through which we can classify problems into easy versus hard? Lant Pritchett and Michael
[Guest 2]: Wilcock proposed two tests to help us think about what is easy and what is hard. They said that
[Guest 2]: count the number of transactions, the touch points between the state and
[Guest 2]: private persons. If there are a large number of transactions, it is more difficult. Okay,
[Guest 2]: so if you have a small number of transactions, maybe you can get by with a small elite core of
[Guest 2]: well motivated, highly trained people, and you'll get the job done. But if you have to have
[Guest 2]: millions of civil servants all over the country, who are interacting with private persons, it's
[Guest 2]: more difficult to solve those principal agent problems and build a large scale machinery that
[Guest 2]: works in a consistent and predictable way. The second test that they posed is, is there
[Guest 2]: discretion? Okay, so for example, if you had to do immunization, there's really no discretion,
[Guest 2]: it's a fixed protocol. Find a child, here's the steps of a polio drop or find a child,
[Guest 2]: here's the steps of an HPV immunization. Okay, so there's no discretion at the front line.
[Guest 2]: All you have to do is find the child, live by a manual. For a contrast, consider something
[Guest 2]: where there's discretion. I'm a schoolteacher, I'm standing in front of a class. What do I do?
[Guest 2]: Do I speak? Do I look at the ceiling? Do I look at the students? Do I make eye contact?
[Guest 2]: Do I engage? Do I lecture for two students sitting at the front desk? Do I try to include
[Guest 2]: everybody in the conversation? Do I ignore girls in the class? Okay, and so on. All this is the
[Guest 2]: discretion of the schoolteacher. And if you want good learning outcomes, we're going to have to
[Guest 2]: work through the behavior of that schoolteacher and it's so much harder because there is high
[Guest 2]: discretion. Okay, so Pritchett and Wilcox argued that there are two dimensions that shape
[Guest 2]: the analysis of whether something is easy or something is hard, which is, are there a large
[Guest 2]: number of transactions or not? And is there high discretion or not? Kelkar and I feel that there
[Guest 2]: are two more dimensions that add greatly to this analysis. Third, we say, are the stakes high or
[Guest 2]: is the stakes low? Okay, so consider going through a red light. If the fine is 200 rupees, the stakes
[Guest 2]: are low. Okay, so the incentives of the policeman are something and yeah, you have to worry that the
[Guest 2]: policeman will take a bribe, but you'll be broadly okay. But if the fine for going through a red
[Guest 2]: light is 20,000 rupees, then suddenly you have a collapse of state capacity because the policeman
[Guest 2]: will only take a bribe. He's never going to charge you the fine of 20,000 rupees, he's going to take
[Guest 2]: a bribe. So the stakes change the complexity of the system. How do you manage and incentivize
[Guest 2]: and incentivize the civil servants to do their work? The answer is, when the stakes are high,
[Guest 2]: it becomes more difficult. So when tax rates are high, when fines are high,
[Guest 2]: when there is arbitrary power of investigation, when there is arbitrary power to raid,
[Guest 2]: when there is arbitrary power to punish, when there is arbitrary power to imprison,
[Guest 2]: the functionaries who wield this power are going to become a law unto themselves. And it is very
[Guest 2]: difficult to rein them in and get them to do the things that they're supposed to do. They will
[Guest 2]: actually pursue their own power. And the last and the fourth dimension that we think is very
[Guest 2]: important is secrecy. If something is done in the open, there is likely to be more hygiene
[Guest 2]: because those individuals will be shamed when they make mistakes.
[Guest 2]: The parts of the Indian state that are shrouded in secrecy, think of the army, think of
[Guest 2]: the intelligence operations, think of the intelligence bureau, think of RAW,
[Guest 2]: think of the secrecy of budget making, think of the secrecy of trading inside the Reserve Bank
[Guest 2]: of India. These are the things that are going to be done badly because there is no check and balance.
[Amit Varma]: Less transparency means less accountability.
[Guest 2]: And where there's less accountability, you will get less performance. So you will get
[Guest 2]: some of the lowest capabilities in the Indian state where there is the highest secrecy. So
[Guest 2]: add up these four, okay? So where there is a large number of transactions, where there is more
[Guest 2]: discretion, where the stakes are high, and where there is high secrecy. These are the hardest
[Guest 2]: places to build state capacity. So it's a nice toolkit that when you face a question classified
[Guest 2]: in these four dimensions, and you'll immediately get a flavor, this is easy, this is hard.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, for example, the example you point out is that monetary policy is easy,
[Amit Varma]: financial regulation is hard. Because monetary policy, not too many transactions, three or four
[Amit Varma]: times a year, you are sort of setting the interest rate.
[Guest 2]: You need about 10 guys who will think about six times a year or four times a year,
[Guest 2]: and you're done. It's not very complicated.
[Amit Varma]: And there's no secrecy, it's all out in the open and blah, blah, blah. Well,
[Amit Varma]: financial regulation is, of course, much harder because so much.
[Amit Varma]: This leads on to your next chapter, which is titled Confident Policymakers Work in the Open.
[Amit Varma]: And you quote Ashok Desai there, quote, in public policy, we don't just dine with friends,
[Amit Varma]: we also sup with fiends, stop quote. The supping with fiends sounds much more fun to me, but yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me more about this, about confident policy makers working in the open.
[Guest 2]: There is a kind of person who thinks of political economy as poison. The play of interests that
[Guest 2]: will shape and influence policy is viewed as a bad thing, as a dangerous thing.
[Guest 2]: But that kind of person views herself as benign, as benevolent.
[Guest 2]: And as all of us grow up, as I grew up, we realized that nobody is benevolent,
[Guest 2]: okay, that we are all frail, we are all bad, there is evil in our hearts.
[Guest 2]: And so there is no good person who's going to come up with the right policies,
[Guest 2]: okay, we are all frail creatures. And in that sense, we stop viewing
[Guest 2]: the tug and pull of political economy as illegitimate.
[Guest 2]: But actually, that is the meaning of democracy. Democracy is a place where many people have a
[Guest 2]: voice. And we engage with all of that. So we sup with fiends, we'll talk with all the characters
[Guest 2]: in the landscape about what is thought to be done. And we will revel in that interaction,
[Guest 2]: we will be part of a legitimate political economy, rather than trying to hatch things
[Guest 2]: in secret and unveil them upon the world. Because I'm so smart, I figured it out.
[Guest 2]: And I will do the right thing. And I will not tell anybody because oh my God,
[Guest 2]: if we tell somebody, then maybe the plan will get delayed.
[Guest 2]: Money bill kar do.
[Guest 2]: So there is this elite conception of policy, versus there is the deepening of Indian democracy.
[Guest 2]: And now that we are older, and we understand these things better, and I freely admit,
[Guest 2]: on most of this book, I have been wrong on these subjects x years ago. So this book is a
[Guest 2]: chronicle of all the mistakes of my life. And in a sense, we're just pulling together
[Guest 2]: the things that we've figured out, which we did not know well previously.
[Amit Varma]: So it is a confessional and an autobiography.
[Guest 2]: Yes, this is a confessional and an autobiographical book.
[Guest 2]: There is an elite conception that there are a few people that know the right thing.
[Guest 2]: And if you only hand over the reins of power to those right people,
[Guest 2]: then in secret, they will hatch the right plans, and they will spring those upon the country. And
[Guest 2]: really, you know, do you believe that that's a good way to proceed?
[Guest 2]: There is no guarantee that power will be in the hands of good people.
[Guest 2]: There is no guarantee that the best people actually understand the complexities of society.
[Guest 2]: And even if you had a benevolent dictator,
[Guest 2]: that is a negation of the fundamental principles of democracy.
[Guest 2]: We are not subjects.
[Guest 2]: So once you learn to respect the concepts of a constitutional democracy,
[Guest 2]: then we must be part of that mainstream, which means talk about it, discuss it,
[Guest 2]: do things in the open, tell the whole world what are the concepts that are being planned,
[Guest 2]: let there be a public debate about rival visions of what has to happen,
[Guest 2]: and then may the best vision win.
[Amit Varma]: We are now subject to what I call Parkinson's law of podcasting,
[Amit Varma]: or maybe Verma's law of podcasting, let me name it after me,
[Amit Varma]: which is the subject to be discussed keeps expanding as the time left for discussion keeps contracting.
[Amit Varma]: And so what I'm now going to do is I'm going to skim over the rest of the section
[Amit Varma]: about the art of policymaking and get down to your section called the public policy process.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, I'm going to skim over these titles very briefly.
[Amit Varma]: Your next chapter was titled criticism and conflict of great value,
[Amit Varma]: which is taking on from the thought you just expressed.
[Amit Varma]: The one after that coming out right always is too high a bar,
[Amit Varma]: where the point you make very simply put is that because policy is so complicated
[Amit Varma]: and so multifactorial, that not everybody is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: things will often go wrong for no fault of your own.
[Amit Varma]: So if you always want to be right, if your incentive is to always be right,
[Amit Varma]: you will never do anything, because that reduces the risk of being wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, if you want people to act, you stop giving credit for right or wrong,
[Amit Varma]: and you appreciate the complexity in the process.
[Amit Varma]: Is that correct?
[Guest 2]: And also, you know, we should get off this high horse that somebody is a great genius,
[Guest 2]: and he'll get everything right.
[Guest 2]: There is this whole hype in the media that put some frail person on a pedestal.
[Guest 2]: And as a consequence, what I've seen is that those persons just freeze up.
[Guest 2]: Because when you are pushed to such a high bar, then the response is to do nothing.
[Guest 2]: I think we will all become a better community,
[Guest 2]: if we will all accept that most of the time things are going to foul up.
[Guest 2]: That, you know, fouling up is a norm and winning is the exception.
[Guest 2]: I think we will all become better human beings,
[Guest 2]: make better decisions, make fewer mistakes.
[Guest 2]: If we go into this with the sense that doing public policy is very hard
[Guest 2]: and social systems are impossibly complicated.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And for more elaboration, just buy the book and read the chapter.
[Amit Varma]: Your next three chapters are sort of titled A Country Is Not A Company,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of speaks for itself, that much harder to administer,
[Amit Varma]: different principles comes into play.
[Amit Varma]: You talk about system thinking and your final chapter is Beware the Rule of Officials.
[Amit Varma]: Like what we want to be governed by is rules and institutions.
[Amit Varma]: And if you give too much discretion to officials,
[Amit Varma]: and they take over the sort of process with the incentives that are in play.
[Guest 2]: Let's just want to underline the democratic legitimacy problem that we in India,
[Guest 2]: especially we the elite in India, tend to think that bureaucrats are people like us.
[Guest 2]: And we slip into giving legitimacy to the rule of officials.
[Guest 2]: But there is a fundamental negation of democratic process there,
[Guest 2]: because the power of officials is very often unaccountable.
[Guest 2]: There are lifetime jobs and there's really no consequences for making mistakes.
[Guest 2]: It is only politics that protects us.
[Guest 2]: And the biggest mistake that we the elite make is the negation of politics.
[Guest 2]: It is only politicians that are accountable.
[Guest 2]: It is only politics that listens to the people and fixes problems and solves problems.
[Guest 2]: So I think that the cultural gap between the Indian political class
[Guest 2]: and the Indian elite has led to a very harmful conception
[Guest 2]: that let's just find some IIT guy who will rule us and things will be okay.
[Guest 2]: And that could be no more profound mistake than that.
[Guest 2]: What we need is genuine democratic politics.
[Guest 2]: We need more democracy, not less.
[Guest 2]: And all too often, I fear that the elite thinking in India has become like,
[Guest 2]: I just want some official, I want some IIT guy to be my ruler,
[Guest 2]: and I'll be the subject and I'll get on and make money.
[Guest 2]: And that is going to bring you to grief over and over.
[Amit Varma]: And there's too much of this sort of great man theory of history mindset
[Amit Varma]: or a feudal mindset where you imagine individuals will make the difference.
[Amit Varma]: While what is important is you need the rules of the game to be such
[Amit Varma]: that even the worst, most incompetent, most malign person you can think of cannot do much damage.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the individual should not matter too much, just fix the rules of the game.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, what is fixable is through politics.
[Amit Varma]: So that's something that elites like us have to stop condescending
[Amit Varma]: and looking down on and engage with more fiercely.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go to the public policy process where a very important chapter in your book is chapter 27,
[Amit Varma]: which talks about, you know, policymaking as a siege.
[Amit Varma]: Am I pronouncing that right?
[Amit Varma]: Policymaking as a siege-style assault,
[Amit Varma]: where you talk about how there are two strategies in mountaineering.
[Amit Varma]: In the siege-style assault, a large team has a base camp,
[Amit Varma]: and then there is a camp above it, and a camp two, and a camp three, and a camp four.
[Amit Varma]: And from here, a few climbers try to get to the top.
[Amit Varma]: And the other alpine-style assault is just a couple of great man of history people
[Amit Varma]: just go climb, try to climb all the way up.
[Amit Varma]: And your point is that public policy should be a siege-style one step at a time.
[Amit Varma]: Elaborate on this.
[Guest 2]: That every now and then we get these two guys,
[Guest 2]: Reinold Messner, who are going to run up a mountain,
[Guest 2]: and they try to do some great things, and it doesn't get done,
[Guest 2]: and it doesn't work very well.
[Guest 2]: Those reforms are superficial, they're not well thought of,
[Guest 2]: and they crumble and fall apart as you go along.
[Guest 2]: And that is why in every field where things got done,
[Guest 2]: what worked was a community came together,
[Guest 2]: where there were 50 people, 100 people who thought about things,
[Guest 2]: debated, wrote papers, argued with each other,
[Guest 2]: complained and wrote articles in the newspaper
[Guest 2]: attacking whatever the government was doing,
[Guest 2]: and took a sustained interest in a field for a long time,
[Guest 2]: and chipped away, crossing the river by feeling the stones and fixing things.
[Guest 2]: So that's how things get done.
[Guest 2]: So you need to organize that community for a siege-style assault.
[Guest 2]: It needs 100 people, not two.
[Amit Varma]: 100 people, not two.
[Amit Varma]: And it needs seven stages.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll quickly go through the seven stages of your policy pipeline,
[Amit Varma]: and then you can elaborate.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, stage one of the policy pipeline is the establishment of the statistical system.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. Stage two of the policy pipeline is descriptive and causal research.
[Amit Varma]: Stage three of the policy pipeline is a creative phase of
[Amit Varma]: inventing and proposing new policy solutions.
[Amit Varma]: Stage four, the public debate where rival solutions compete with each other.
[Amit Varma]: Stage five, the internal government process of decision making.
[Amit Varma]: Stage six, the translation of the decisions into legal instruments.
[Amit Varma]: Stage seven, the construction of state capacity
[Amit Varma]: in the form of administrative structures that enforce the law.
[Guest 2]: So this is what we call the policy pipeline.
[Guest 2]: And this is a general framework to think about
[Guest 2]: essentially everything in the public policy landscape.
[Guest 2]: That first, you've got to start with the data.
[Guest 2]: If you don't have data, you are living in some fictional world
[Guest 2]: and you have no idea what's going on.
[Guest 2]: So you have to build statistics.
[Guest 2]: And you can see how it may take many years for the statistics to come together.
[Guest 2]: So again, if you rage, rage against the problem that you see,
[Guest 2]: that doesn't mean you'll solve it.
[Guest 2]: Because if you don't have data, you might as well just stop.
[Guest 2]: So you can't do anything.
[Guest 2]: And you have to first establish the measurement systems
[Guest 2]: and you have to let some years go by and then the data comes about.
[Amit Varma]: And what you take head on also in this chapter is that
[Amit Varma]: old saw about a crisis is too good a thing to waste.
[Amit Varma]: And what you point out is that a crisis on its own is not enough.
[Amit Varma]: You also need a framework before it,
[Amit Varma]: like the first three steps of the six stages that you prescribed.
[Amit Varma]: And you use 1991 as an example.
[Guest 2]: So if I may just quickly run through the pipeline,
[Guest 2]: then once you've got the data, you've got to have a bunch of researchers
[Guest 2]: who will study that data and mine it for insight
[Guest 2]: and develop knowledge about the world.
[Guest 2]: And we need an ample supply of researchers.
[Guest 2]: And there are many problems in the academic community.
[Guest 2]: But ultimately, you want people who care about the world
[Guest 2]: and will study the world and produce knowledge about the world.
[Guest 2]: Descriptive knowledge is important.
[Guest 2]: Causal knowledge is important.
[Guest 2]: So you develop deep insights.
[Guest 2]: Then comes stage three that, okay, I've got all this knowledge about the world.
[Guest 2]: And now you need creative leaps to think about policy that, okay,
[Guest 2]: what would be a nice, efficient, minimum coercion,
[Guest 2]: government intervention that will address the market failure?
[Guest 2]: And we'll get the job done in a feasible and implementable way
[Guest 2]: under Indian conditions,
[Guest 2]: under our constraints of bureaucratic capabilities and so on.
[Guest 2]: But there will always be,
[Guest 2]: there should be multiple rival conceptions of how we might go about.
[Guest 2]: And that's the only healthy way for the republic that there should not be one,
[Guest 2]: there should be five or 20.
[Guest 2]: And then there is a public debate stage where many alternative conceptions argue
[Guest 2]: in conferences, in seminars, in newspapers,
[Guest 2]: in quiet meetings between you and me before the podcast recording began.
[Guest 2]: We argue about the world and we disagree, and that's perfectly good and healthy.
[Guest 2]: And then that sets the stage for some government decision-making process
[Guest 2]: where some legislators get together and think this is the right way
[Guest 2]: we should approach the law or some people in the executive field
[Guest 2]: that this kind of bureaucratic structure needs to be changed from this to that.
[Guest 2]: And then once those decisions are made,
[Guest 2]: they need to be encoded into legal instruments.
[Guest 2]: That's where we need a unique kind of programming
[Guest 2]: where the coder is the author of the law.
[Guest 2]: So those coders are required who have the full understanding
[Guest 2]: of the domain and the problem space and the solution space
[Guest 2]: and are able to draft high quality laws.
[Guest 2]: And this is our tiny breed that is barely available in India today.
[Guest 2]: And then finally, you come to the management problem that,
[Guest 2]: okay, I've got the law, who's going to enforce it?
[Guest 2]: What is the public ad problem of the management structures
[Guest 2]: through which government organizations will come about?
[Guest 2]: And this is the whole pipeline that has to come together to get things done.
[Guest 2]: And if we don't have the whole pipeline, things don't get done.
[Guest 2]: And that again, it's a siege-style assault that we think of it as camp by camp.
[Guest 2]: We have to go solve these problems from left to right.
[Guest 2]: And if you try to just sprint to that outcome,
[Guest 2]: and you've not laid those foundations, then it doesn't work.
[Amit Varma]: And the point you made about the 91 crisis is that
[Amit Varma]: you had base camp, camp one, camp two already.
[Guest 2]: So Kelkar emphasizes that when the 91 crisis came along,
[Guest 2]: there was an entire intellectual community
[Guest 2]: that had thought hard about these issues.
[Guest 2]: And what we call the IMF conditionality
[Guest 2]: was actually drafted by the Indian side.
[Guest 2]: There was a strong, capable community in India
[Guest 2]: that had understood these things and was ready to run.
[Guest 2]: And that is how the crisis led to the change.
[Guest 2]: If you merely want a crisis, as you know, we say in the book,
[Guest 2]: we talk about the horrific rape event in New Delhi.
[Guest 2]: It was an amazing moment when the envelope of what is possible
[Guest 2]: in the political system had enlarged.
[Guest 2]: But the previous stages of the pipeline were not there.
[Guest 2]: There hadn't been intellectual capacity.
[Guest 2]: There was no data, there was no research,
[Guest 2]: there was no intellectual community.
[Guest 2]: There had not been a debate.
[Guest 2]: So at that moment, when you think,
[Guest 2]: what do I want to change about the criminal justice system?
[Guest 2]: We were not ready.
[Guest 2]: The criminal justice system is laws, courts,
[Guest 2]: public prosecutors, prisons, forensic labs,
[Guest 2]: that entire institutional arrangement is broken.
[Guest 2]: But we just don't have the statistics.
[Guest 2]: We don't have the intellectual community.
[Guest 2]: We don't have the public debates on how to fix this.
[Guest 2]: So then those amazing moments come about
[Guest 2]: and nothing much gets done.
[Guest 2]: And in fact, potentially very harmful stuff
[Guest 2]: gets done in that moment of crisis,
[Guest 2]: because the people in charge want to be seen as doing something.
[Guest 2]: And then they're just operating on seat of the pants
[Guest 2]: or populism or both,
[Guest 2]: because they want to be seen to be doing something.
[Guest 2]: But frankly, the capabilities are not there.
[Guest 2]: And we're not able to utilize those moments.
[Amit Varma]: We've got like 15 minutes left of the recording
[Amit Varma]: and there is a ton of material still left in your book.
[Amit Varma]: Extremely insightful.
[Amit Varma]: I recommend everyone read it.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's absolutely an essential read
[Amit Varma]: for not just people who are interested in public policy,
[Amit Varma]: but anyone who wants to sort of understand the country
[Amit Varma]: and understand because everything eventually comes down
[Amit Varma]: to this interplay between the state and society
[Amit Varma]: and the incentives under which all of us function,
[Amit Varma]: which are a combination of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what is happening in this larger field of play.
[Amit Varma]: I want to now turn to sort of questions about like,
[Amit Varma]: I know you've been very motivated to write this book.
[Amit Varma]: We spoke about it a few months ago, right?
[Amit Varma]: You expressed an anguish that the policy community
[Amit Varma]: was actually losing intellectual capacity
[Amit Varma]: and that these ideas needed to be preserved.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that, about your experience.
[Amit Varma]: You've been working in government,
[Amit Varma]: in the finance ministry and fine IPFP,
[Amit Varma]: which is sort of almost a government think tank
[Amit Varma]: for, you know, since the 90s.
[Amit Varma]: What are your incentives?
[Amit Varma]: Why do you do this?
[Guest 2]: That's a very difficult question.
[Guest 2]: I want to go back to something I said to you
[Guest 2]: in a previous podcast.
[Guest 2]: I said that I'm a visitor from the 20th century
[Guest 2]: to this world.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's really the guiding metaphor,
[Guest 2]: that I think we learned something about politics
[Guest 2]: and state in the 20th century,
[Guest 2]: which has been forgotten today.
[Guest 2]: We understood something about the importance of democracy
[Guest 2]: and markets and liberal values
[Guest 2]: and basic humanity in the 20th century.
[Guest 2]: And I think there is a whole world today
[Guest 2]: that has lost touch with those grand questions.
[Guest 2]: And we are embarking on lots of mistakes
[Guest 2]: because the institutional memory has gone away.
[Guest 2]: So I think that this book is as much a part
[Guest 2]: of that experiential development of knowledge about India
[Guest 2]: and also something about the connection
[Guest 2]: to the grand themes about the state
[Guest 2]: and the republic on a larger timeframe.
[Guest 2]: We have come to a very difficult moment in India's history.
[Guest 2]: We got 20 years of great growth
[Guest 2]: because Mark II played out well.
[Guest 2]: Mark II began in some ways in 1977.
[Guest 2]: We got a small increase in GDP growth right from 79,
[Guest 2]: and then an amazing period, 91 to 2011.
[Amit Varma]: But then we've run out of steam.
[Amit Varma]: With 350 million people coming out of poverty,
[Amit Varma]: which has like tremendous moral implications.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you consider the counterfactual
[Amit Varma]: of keeping those people in poverty.
[Amit Varma]: It's horrendous.
[Amit Varma]: It's a crime.
[Guest 2]: And we've lost our way.
[Guest 2]: And after 2011, things have not gone well.
[Guest 2]: And I don't want to emphasize the idea
[Guest 2]: that there is any event in 2011 that did it.
[Guest 2]: No, all these things are long, slow processes.
[Guest 2]: The growth acceleration of 91,
[Guest 2]: the foundations of this had been laid
[Guest 2]: over many years before.
[Guest 2]: In similar fashion, 2011 is the end
[Guest 2]: of the high growth period.
[Guest 2]: But the foundations of that slowdown
[Guest 2]: had been laid over the previous decade.
[Guest 2]: So it's 10 years of difficulties that added up
[Guest 2]: to the loss of private sector confidence
[Guest 2]: and the decline in investment,
[Guest 2]: which has brought us today.
[Guest 2]: And so in the Indian political discourse
[Guest 2]: and the economic policy discourse,
[Guest 2]: there's a lot of people shopping for measures
[Guest 2]: that let me do this measure or that measure.
[Guest 2]: And our big idea is that no,
[Guest 2]: you need to go back to foundations,
[Guest 2]: that there is something bigger that is amiss,
[Guest 2]: that the concepts and principles of Mark II
[Guest 2]: have not quite played out in the way that was intended.
[Guest 2]: And so we need to think deeper.
[Guest 2]: And in one line, it is,
[Guest 2]: can we think more deeply about state capacity?
[Guest 2]: Can we think about market failure?
[Guest 2]: Where do you have a government?
[Guest 2]: Instead, what we've landed up in India
[Guest 2]: is an administrative state,
[Guest 2]: where we've just got the rule of officials.
[Guest 2]: We've got officials intruding upon the mind
[Guest 2]: and the space and the sanctity of private persons
[Guest 2]: all over the place,
[Guest 2]: to a point where private persons feel unsafe.
[Guest 2]: And that does not create conditions
[Guest 2]: for creativity and risk-taking and imagination.
[Guest 2]: So we need to go back to the foundations
[Guest 2]: of what is the Indian state
[Guest 2]: and how might we change things
[Guest 2]: so as to come back to that vibrant period
[Guest 2]: of excitement and optimism and creativity and risk-taking
[Guest 2]: and commitment to building organizations
[Guest 2]: and organizational capital in private firms,
[Guest 2]: which is the heart and soul of every society.
[Amit Varma]: And what do you sort of think about
[Amit Varma]: what I look at as a twin political events
[Amit Varma]: of the last 10 years,
[Amit Varma]: enabled and exacerbated by social media,
[Amit Varma]: which is one, the extreme polarization of the discourse,
[Amit Varma]: where a lot of those reasonable conversations
[Amit Varma]: where people are talking to each other
[Amit Varma]: have been replaced by posturing
[Amit Varma]: to people's own in-groups to raise their status within them
[Amit Varma]: and people talking past each other
[Amit Varma]: as one increasingly sees on social media.
[Amit Varma]: And the second, the ease of building
[Amit Varma]: and sustaining a false narrative
[Amit Varma]: through social media, for example,
[Amit Varma]: through the military use of WhatsApp by a military,
[Amit Varma]: I don't mean the army is using it,
[Amit Varma]: but in that sense,
[Amit Varma]: through the assault on social media,
[Amit Varma]: on the people where we can believe in narratives
[Amit Varma]: that don't conform to reality
[Amit Varma]: and vote accordingly.
[Amit Varma]: And if these two are happening,
[Amit Varma]: then is the space for discourse
[Amit Varma]: and therefore reform actually shrinking?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the two questions
[Amit Varma]: I often ask my guests at the end of a show,
[Amit Varma]: depending on the subject of their expertise is,
[Amit Varma]: what gives you hope and what gives you despair?
[Guest 2]: Shreyas I share your concerns
[Guest 2]: about the world of social media.
[Guest 2]: As you know, I do not participate on Twitter.
[Guest 2]: I do not have a Facebook account and so on.
[Guest 2]: So I feel that there's something
[Guest 2]: about you and me meeting as human beings
[Guest 2]: and talking over chai and on omelette,
[Guest 2]: which is fundamentally more civilized.
[Guest 2]: If we were trading insults on Facebook
[Guest 2]: or on Twitter,
[Guest 2]: it would be fundamentally infeasible
[Guest 2]: for us to find common ground.
[Amit Varma]: Hamid I just realized that I am an Hamid
[Amit Varma]: and you are a Shah.
[Guest 2]: Continue.
[Guest 2]: Shreyas Yeah, so I think it's very important
[Guest 2]: for us to build an intellectual community,
[Guest 2]: to build conversations between all of us
[Guest 2]: without being intermediated
[Guest 2]: by social media platforms.
[Guest 2]: And in the Indian policy community,
[Guest 2]: there is a need to think more deeply
[Guest 2]: about what is economics, what is politics,
[Guest 2]: what is the state.
[Guest 2]: We need to step away from some of this
[Guest 2]: China model stuff,
[Guest 2]: where there are people who just want
[Guest 2]: some engineers to run the place.
[Guest 2]: And I'd like to be a subject that makes money.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's a very limiting vision
[Guest 2]: and it does not work
[Guest 2]: and it won't work in India.
[Guest 2]: And it probably won't work in China either.
[Guest 2]: But there has been a very wasteful detour
[Guest 2]: for 10-20 years in the Indian body politic
[Guest 2]: where there is an attempt at copying
[Guest 2]: the Chinese approach of some engineers
[Guest 2]: commanding power and reshaping society.
[Guest 2]: And I think it is important to go back to basics
[Guest 2]: and think more deeply about
[Guest 2]: what is the economics and politics
[Guest 2]: of a liberal democracy
[Guest 2]: and for all of us to develop a shared vocabulary
[Guest 2]: and a conceptual framework
[Guest 2]: on how to think about it.
[Guest 2]: And that's our attempt in this book,
[Guest 2]: that can we find some common ground?
[Guest 2]: Can we find some shared vocabulary?
[Guest 2]: Because in a way, we are all today
[Guest 2]: partly grappling with an unknown.
[Guest 2]: We are dealing with this China model streak
[Guest 2]: in our body politic,
[Guest 2]: which is a truly harmful development
[Guest 2]: of really a low quality version
[Guest 2]: of Nehru and Mahalanobis,
[Guest 2]: of some engineers trying to design society
[Guest 2]: and roll out one system after another.
[Guest 2]: And there shall be one this and one that.
[Guest 2]: And we're doing this in a context
[Guest 2]: where the civility of our discourse
[Guest 2]: and the human bonds
[Guest 2]: that tie you and me together
[Guest 2]: are being damaged every day
[Guest 2]: by the experience of social media.
[Guest 2]: You worry about what social media
[Guest 2]: is doing to the masses
[Guest 2]: and you are right to worry.
[Guest 2]: I also worry about what social media
[Guest 2]: is doing to you and me.
[Guest 2]: We, the elite, have been damaged by social media.
[Guest 2]: So we have to be very conscious
[Guest 2]: of the destruction of mutual respect
[Guest 2]: and shared vocabulary
[Guest 2]: that has come about
[Guest 2]: in this world of the social media.
[Guest 2]: And I think we all need to talk
[Guest 2]: to each other much more
[Guest 2]: and learn to give and take
[Guest 2]: and learn to respect
[Guest 2]: and stop hating so much.
[Guest 2]: Respect that the world is complicated
[Guest 2]: and there are many different
[Guest 2]: legitimate points of view
[Guest 2]: that if you disagree with me,
[Guest 2]: it's not because you're a bad person,
[Guest 2]: it's not because you're a fool,
[Guest 2]: but because you see the world differently
[Guest 2]: and I am the beneficiary
[Guest 2]: of stepping into your shoes
[Guest 2]: and seeing the world
[Guest 2]: from your point of view of
[Guest 2]: why might it be that a reasonable person
[Guest 2]: sees this differently.
[Guest 2]: I think we will all benefit
[Guest 2]: if we are able to restore
[Guest 2]: some of those old ways.
[Guest 2]: The optimism and the solutionism
[Guest 2]: that came with the early age of the internet
[Guest 2]: is mercifully ebbing.
[Guest 2]: And I think it is time for all of us
[Guest 2]: to start questioning
[Guest 2]: the ways in which we have learned
[Guest 2]: to talk to each other
[Guest 2]: in this electronic age.
[Guest 2]: And I think we need to restore
[Guest 2]: some of that old culture.
[Amit Varma]: Very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: Ajay, I learnt a lot reading this book
[Amit Varma]: and I've in fact learnt a lot
[Amit Varma]: by reading you over the years
[Amit Varma]: and chatting with you over the years
[Amit Varma]: over chai and omelette.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen,
[Amit Varma]: do hop over to your nearest bookstore,
[Amit Varma]: online or offline
[Amit Varma]: and pick up in-service
[Amit Varma]: In Service of the Republic,
[Amit Varma]: The Art and Science of Economic Policy
[Amit Varma]: by Vijay Kelkar and Ajay Shah.
[Amit Varma]: An outstanding book.
[Amit Varma]: Absolute must read
[Amit Varma]: and there's a very good chance
[Amit Varma]: it will change the way
[Amit Varma]: you think about a lot of things.
[Amit Varma]: Ajay, as he just mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: is not on social media
[Amit Varma]: and neither is Vijay.
[Amit Varma]: Wise people.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of The Scene and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: is supported by
[Amit Varma]: the Takshashila Institution
[Amit Varma]: and Independent Centre
[Amit Varma]: for Public Policy.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.